 Real CHANGE

A NEW PLAN FOR A

 
ILE

    
  

 
 


's

 





 
 

 

Contents
Growth for the Middle Class.................................................................................................3
Economic security for the middle class..................................................................................................................4
Investing to strengthen the middle class...........................................................................................................11
Help that works for modern Canadian families.............................................................................................18

Fair and Open Government................................................................................................23
Open and transparent government......................................................................................................................24
Open and fair elections...............................................................................................................................................26
Giving Canadians a voice in Ottawa.....................................................................................................................29
Better service for Canadians....................................................................................................................................33
Evidence-based policy.................................................................................................................................................36

A Clean Environment and a Strong Economy..............................................................38
A Strong Canada.....................................................................................................................45
A renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples........................................................................................46
The future we owe our veterans............................................................................................................................49
Keeping Canadians safe..............................................................................................................................................52
Investing in our cultural and creative industries............................................................................................56
Supporting strong communities.............................................................................................................................59

Security and Opportunity...................................................................................................61
Opening the door to prosperity..............................................................................................................................62
A more compassionate Canada..............................................................................................................................64
Expanding exports and opportunities for Canadians..................................................................................66
Renewing Canada’s place in the world and strengthening our security...........................................68

Fiscal Plan and Costing.........................................................................................................72

© Copyright 2015 Liberal Party of Canada. All Rights Reserved.
Authorized by the Federal Liberal Agency of Canada, registered agent for the Liberal Party of Canada.

 
.. Ah?Kw 

iddle Class

 

CHAPTER ONE

Growth for the



ECONOMIC SECURITY
FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS
A strong economy starts with a strong middle class. Our plan
offers real help to Canada’s middle class and all those working hard to
join it. When our middle class has more money in their pockets to save,
invest, and grow the economy, we all benefit.

HELPING FAMILIES

We will give families more money to help with the high cost of raising their
kids.
We will cancel tax breaks and benefits for the wealthy – including the Universal
Child Care Benefit – and introduce a new Canada Child Benefit to give Canadian
families more money to raise their kids.
With the Canada Child Benefit, nine out of ten Canadian families will receive
more than under Stephen Harper’s confusing collection of child benefit programs.
For the typical family of four, that means an additional $2,500 in help, tax-free,
every year.
Household
Income

Family with 1 child

Family with 2 children

Our Plan

Harper’s Plan

Our Plan

Harper’s Plan

$15,000

$6,400

$5,825

$11,800

$10,175

$45,000

$5,380

$3,350

$9,850

$5,900

$90,000

$3,245

$2,125

$5,875

$3,300

$140,000

$1,695

$1,500

$3,125

$2,050

$200,000

$0

$1,425

$0

$1,950

4   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 Because the Canada Child Benefit is tax-free and tied to income, it also provides
greater support to those who need help the most: single-parent families and lowincome families. Our plan will lift 315,000 Canadian children out of poverty.
Stephen Harper thinks that government should provide child support payments
to millionaires. We will end that unfair giveaway.

MIDDLE CLASS
TAX CUT

We will give middle class Canadians a tax break, by making taxes more fair.
When middle class Canadians have more money in their pockets to save, invest,
and grow the economy, we all benefit.
We will cut the middle income tax bracket to 20.5 percent from 22 percent –
a seven percent reduction. Canadians with taxable annual income between
$44,700 and $89,401 will see their income tax rate fall.
This tax relief is worth up to $670 per person, per year – or $1,340 for a twoincome household.
To pay for this tax cut, we will ask the wealthiest one percent of Canadians to give
a little more. We will introduce a new tax bracket of 33 percent for individuals
earning more than $200,000 each year.

ENDING UNFAIR
TAX BREAKS

We will cancel income splitting and other tax breaks and benefits for the
wealthy.
Income splitting costs the federal government $2 billion a year but delivers
benefits to only a few. It will not create a single job. It will not give one young
person an opportunity to get ahead.
Income splitting delivers no benefits to working parents who earn similar salaries,
no benefits to single parents, and no benefits to Canadians who do not have kids.
All told, income splitting benefits only about 15 percent of Canadian households.
We will cancel Stephen Harper’s tax breaks for the wealthy, to give Canadian
families more money to raise their children.

OPPORTUNITIES FOR
YOUNG CANADIANS

We will invest to create more jobs and better opportunities for young
Canadians.
After ten years under Stephen Harper, good-quality job opportunities for young
Canadians are tougher and tougher to find. Faced with high unemployment and
underemployment, many young people have stopped looking for work altogether.
This is hard for both young people and their families. Many parents are seeing

5   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 their household debt rise and retirement savings dwindle as they struggle to
support their grown children, who often return home.
It is time to invest in young Canadians – to help them get the work experience
they will need to start their careers and contribute fully to our economy.
We will create 40,000 good youth jobs – including 5,000 youth green jobs – each
year for the next three years, by investing $300 million more in the renewed
Youth Employment Strategy.
We will more than double the almost 11,000 Canadians who access Skills Link
each year. This program helps young Canadians – including Aboriginal and
disabled youth – make a more successful transition to the workplace.
After this initial three-year boost in funding, we will set the renewed Youth
Employment Strategy’s funding level at $385 million per year – a $50 million
increase from 2015/16.
We will invest $40 million each year to help employers create more co-op
placements for students in science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and
business programs.
And to encourage companies to hire young Canadians for permanent positions,
we will also offer a 12-month break on Employment Insurance premiums. We will
waive employer premiums for all those between the ages of 18 and 24 who are
hired into a permanent position in 2016, 2017, or 2018.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and post-secondary institutions to
develop or expand Pre-Apprenticeship Training Programs. This will provide up
to $10 million per year to help young Canadians gain the skills they need to enter
high-demand trades.
We will end the rule that discriminates against new workers and those reentering the workforce by requiring them to accumulate 910 hours of work to
qualify for Employment Insurance benefits, including training support.
We will invest $25 million per year in a restored Youth Service Program, to give
young Canadians valuable work and life experience, and provide communities
with the help required for much-needed projects.

RETIREMENT
SECURITY

We will provide Canadians with a more secure retirement.
After a lifetime of hard work, Canadians have earned a secure and dignified
retirement, but too many now wonder when – or even if – that will happen.
We will help Canadians realize their goal of a secure retirement.

That security starts with a strong and stable pension program. We will work with
6   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 the provinces and territories, workers, employers, and retiree organizations to
enhance the Canada Pension Plan.
We will not end pension income splitting for seniors.
Sophia is a widow living in
Montreal. She values her
independence and does not
want to ask her adult children
for financial assistance. Our plan
will give her an additional $920
each year to help pay for the
cost of utilities, groceries, and
prescriptions.

We will also restore the eligibility age for Old Age Security and the Guaranteed
Income Supplement to 65, putting an average of $13,000 into the pockets of the
lowest income Canadians each year, as they become seniors.
We will help to lift hundreds of thousands of seniors out of poverty by increasing
the Guaranteed Income Supplement for single low-income seniors by ten
percent. This will give one million of our most vulnerable seniors – who are often
women – almost $1,000 more each year.
Because many seniors live on fixed incomes, we will introduce a new Seniors
Price Index to make sure that Old Age Security and the Guaranteed Income
Supplement benefits keep up with seniors’ actual rising costs.
We will also make the Compassionate Care Benefit more flexible and easier to
access, so that those who are caring for seriously ill family members – not just
family members who are at risk of death – can access six months of benefits.

AFFORDABLE
HOUSING

We will make it easier for Canadians to find an affordable place to call home.
Today, one in four Canadian households is paying more than it can afford for
housing, and one in eight cannot find affordable housing that is safe, suitable, and
well maintained.
When affordable housing is in short supply, Canadians feel less secure and our
whole economy suffers.
We will renew federal leadership in housing, starting with a new, ten-year
investment in social infrastructure.
We will prioritize investments in affordable housing and seniors’ facilities, build
more new housing units and refurbish old ones, give support to municipalities to
maintain rent-geared-to-income subsidies in co-ops, and give communities the
money they need for Housing First initiatives that help homeless Canadians find
stable housing.
We will encourage the construction of new rental housing by removing all GST
on new capital investments in affordable rental housing. This will provide $125
million per year in tax incentives to grow and renovate the supply of rental
housing across Canada.
We will modernize the existing Home Buyers’ Plan to allow Canadians impacted
by sudden and significant life changes to buy a house without tax penalty. This
will ease the burden on Canadians facing job relocation, the death of a spouse,
marital breakdown, or a decision to accommodate an elderly family member.

7   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 We will direct the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation and the new
Canada Infrastructure Bank to provide financing to support the construction of
new, affordable rental housing for middle- and low-income Canadians.
We will conduct an inventory of all available federal lands and buildings that could
be repurposed, and make some of these lands available at low cost for affordable
housing in communities where there is a pressing need.
We will review escalating home prices in high-priced markets, like Toronto and
Vancouver, and consider all policy tools that could keep home ownership within
reach for more Canadians.
We will also immediately restore the mandatory long-form census to ensure that
decisions on housing are made using the best and most up-to-date data available.

POST-SECONDARY
EDUCATION

We will make post-secondary education more affordable.
For too many Canadians, rising costs have made post-secondary education
increasingly out of reach.
It is harder and harder for middle class families to save for their kids’ education,
while many lower-income families are not able to save at all. At the same time,
the federal government spends billions each year on non-refundable tax credits
that offer little direct help for students when they need it.

Seema’s parents earn $65,000
each year. Under our plan, she
would be eligible for an annual
grant of $2,000 instead of the
$800 she is eligible for today.

Tyler comes from a single-parent
family that earns $30,000 each
year. He would be eligible for an
annual grant of $3,000 under our
plan, compared to the $2,000 he
is eligible for today.

We will provide direct help to students from low- and middle-income families to
help them pay for their education and ensure that debt loads are manageable.
We will increase the maximum Canada Student Grant for low-income students
to $3,000 per year for full-time students, and to $1,800 per year for part-time
students.
In addition, to help more students from middle class families qualify for Canada
Student Grants, we will increase the income thresholds for eligibility, giving more
Canadian students access to even larger grants. This investment will be funded
by cancelling the poorly targeted education and textbook tax credits. The tuition
tax credit will be maintained.
This will increase the level of non-repayable grant assistance to students by $750
million per year, rising to $900 million per year by 2019/20.
We will also make our student loan system more flexible. We will ensure that no
graduate with student loans will be required to make any repayment until they
are earning an income of at least $25,000 per year.
This will be done by changing the income thresholds in the Repayment Assistance
Plan for recent graduates. The federal government will continue to pay the
interest on student loans until graduates begin to earn sufficient incomes to take
over their own payments and repay their own loans.

8   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 We will work with provinces and territories to ensure that they do not assume
any additional costs, and to make sure these investments go directly to students.
Appropriate compensation will be offered to provinces and territories that do
not participate in the Canada Student Loan program.
We will also work collaboratively with provinces and territories to improve
promotion of RESPs and Canada Learning Bonds, and to make registration
simpler for all families.
We will invest $50 million in additional annual support to the Post-Secondary
Student Support Program, which supports Indigenous students attending postsecondary education, and will allow the program to grow in line with increasing
demand.

A NEW HEALTH
ACCORD

We will make home care more available, prescription drugs more affordable,
and mental health care more accessible.
Canada’s publicly-funded universal health care system is a source of pride for
Canadians – and a source of economic security for the middle class and those
working hard to join it. When Canadians are in good physical and mental health,
they are able to work better, be more productive, and contribute more fully to
our economy while living healthier, happier lives.
Despite our health care system’s value and importance, it has been more than a
decade since a Canadian Prime Minister sat down with provincial and territorial
Premiers to strengthen the program, and ensure that it can meet current needs
and the challenges that come with an aging population.
We will restart that important conversation and provide the collaborative federal
leadership that has been missing during the Harper decade.
We will negotiate a new Health Accord with provinces and territories, including a
long-term agreement on funding.
As an immediate commitment, we will invest $3 billion, over the next four years,
to deliver more and better home care services for all Canadians. This includes
more access to high quality in-home caregivers, financial supports for family care,
and, when necessary, palliative care.
To help families care for their loved ones at home, we will make the Employment
Insurance Compassionate Care Benefit more flexible and easier to access, so that
it provides help for more than just end-of-life care.
We will also develop a pan-Canadian collaboration on health innovation, and
will improve access to necessary prescription medications. We will join with
provincial and territorial governments to buy drugs in bulk, reducing the cost
Canadian governments pay for these drugs, and making them more affordable
for Canadians.

9   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 We will make high-quality mental health services more available to Canadians
who need them, including our veterans and first responders.
To eliminate systemic barriers and deliver equality of opportunity to all Canadians
living with disabilities, we will consult with provinces, territories, and other
stakeholders to introduce a National Disabilities Act.

FIGHTING POVERTY

We will also lift more Canadians – including children and seniors – out of
poverty.
Poverty and inequality are not just problems for individual Canadians – all of
Canada is affected. For Canadians, poverty makes it more difficult to get and
stay healthy, and more difficult to find and keep good work. For Canada, the
costs of poverty – seen in higher health care costs and greater demand for social
assistance – are immense.
Our plan will lift Canadians out of poverty starting immediately after the next
election.
We will introduce a new Canada Child Benefit. Tax-free, tied to income and
delivered monthly, this benefit provides greater support to those who need help
most: single-parent families and low-income families. It will lift 315,000 children
out of poverty.
We will help to lift hundreds of thousands of seniors out of poverty by increasing
the Guaranteed Income Supplement for single low-income seniors by ten
percent. This will give one million of our most vulnerable seniors – who are often
women – almost $1,000 more each year.
And, as part of our new investment in social infrastructure, we will prioritize
investments in affordable housing and seniors’ facilities, build more new housing
units and refurbish old ones, give support to municipalities to maintain rentgeared-to-income subsidies in co-ops, and give communities the money they
need for Housing First initiatives that help homeless Canadians find stable
housing.

10   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 INVESTING TO STRENGTHEN
THE MIDDLE CLASS
Under Stephen Harper, Canada’s economy has faltered, and our
middle class now finds it harder and harder to make ends meet. It is
time for smart, strategic investments that will turn our economy around
and get it growing again. Our plan will deliver the services we need,
create jobs, and restore economic security to the middle class.

INVESTING NOW

We will invest now in the projects our country needs and the people who can
build them.
Interest rates are at historic lows, our current infrastructure is aging rapidly, and
our economy is stuck in neutral. Now is the time to invest.
18
16

INVESTMENT ($B)

14

FUTURE INFRASTRUCTURE SPENDING
STATUS QUO

NEW LIBERAL INVESTMENTS

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

2016-17

2017-18

2018-19

11   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

2019-20

2020-21

2021-22

2022-23

2023-24

2024-25

2025-26

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 We will run modest short-term deficits of less than $10 billion in each of the next
two fiscal years to fund historic investments in infrastructure and our middle
class.
After the next two fiscal years, the deficit will decline and our investment plan will
return Canada to a balanced budget in 2019.

PUBLIC TRANSIT

We will invest in public transit to shorten commute times, cut air pollution,
strengthen our communities, and grow our economy.
Canadian cities have been growing at a rapid rate, but investment in public transit
has not kept pace.
Stephen Harper’s failure to invest has led to worsening traffic congestion, making
it harder for families to spend time together. This gridlock also costs our economy
billions of dollars in lost productivity each year.
We will get our communities moving again, by giving our provinces, territories,
and municipalities the long-term, predictable federal funding they need to make
transit plans a reality.
Over the next decade, we will quadruple federal investment in public transit,
investing almost $20 billion more in transit infrastructure.
In communities all across Canada, transit projects are ready to go.
In British Columbia’s Lower Mainland, for example, plans are in place to:
• 

increase SeaBus service to every ten minutes during morning and
afternoon rushes;

• 

extend rapid transit service along Broadway, currently the busiest bus
corridor in North America; and

• 

bring light rail transit to Surrey, one of the fastest growing parts of the
region.

We will work with provinces and municipalities across the country to get projects
like these done.

12   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 STRONGER
COMMUNITIES

We will strengthen our communities by investing in the things that make
them good places to live.
Investing in our communities is not just about creating good jobs and economic
growth. It is also about building communities that we are proud to call home.
With historic new investments in social infrastructure, we will achieve both.
We will improve quality of life for millions of Canadians by prioritizing investment
in affordable housing, seniors’ facilities, early learning and child care, and cultural
and recreational infrastructure.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and First Nations to create a new
National Early Learning and Child Care Framework, to ensure that affordable,
high-quality, fully inclusive child care is available to all families who need it.
Over the next decade, we will invest almost $20 billion more in Canada’s
social infrastructure.
Toronto’s Alexandra Park is an example of an urban community where
investments in social infrastructure are already building a brighter future for its
residents.
Aging community housing is being replaced with new affordable housing,
new commercial spaces, and new parkland – all helping to grow this vibrant
neighbourhood and improve the quality of life for all who call it home.
With a federal partner at the table, stories like the revitalization of Alexandra
Park can happen in communities all across Canada.

GREENER
COMMUNITIES

We will invest in sustainable infrastructure that makes our communities
safer and more resilient.
Responsible governments do not walk away from challenges, or pretend they
do not exist. We will protect our communities from the challenges of climate
change and grow our economy by making significant new investments in green
infrastructure.
This includes investments in local water and wastewater facilities; clean
energy; climate resilient infrastructure, including flood mitigation systems; and
infrastructure to protect against changing weather.
We will boost investment in green infrastructure by nearly $6 billion over the
next four years, and almost $20 billion over ten years.

13   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 When it comes to infrastructure that will help keep Canadians safe and better
prepared for emergencies, local leaders know what needs to be done. What they
need is a federal partner willing to invest to help build stronger, more resilient
communities.
In St. John’s, this means upgrades to its wastewater plant.
In Trois-Rivières, this means improving the Maples and Cardinal-Roy reservoirs,
and finding ways to mitigate the regular flooding of the Millette, Bettez, and
Lacerte rivers.
In Calgary and Southern Alberta, this means investments in flood mitigation
projects, to help protect local families and businesses.

NEW BUILDING
CANADA FUND

We will make the New Building Canada Fund more focused and more
transparent.
The New Building Canada Fund is an important source of infrastructure funding
for Canadian communities, but it has been hit by dramatic cuts and is heavily
back-loaded, with more than 70 percent of its funding locked away until after
2019.
We will make the New Building Canada Fund more focused. By providing
significant, separate investments in public transit, social infrastructure, and green
infrastructure, we will enable the New Building Canada Fund to make greater
investments in Canada’s roads, bridges, transportation corridors, ports, and
border gateways, helping Canada’s manufacturers get their goods to market.
We will also make the fund more transparent, by providing clearer project criteria,
along with faster approval processes.

KEEPING OUR
COMMITMENT TO
COMMUNITIES

We will make sure that no money intended for investment in communities is
allowed to lapse.
Too often, Stephen Harper budgeted funds for use in our communities, then
let those dollars go unspent. We will make sure our communities are not
shortchanged.
Near the end of the fiscal year, we will automatically transfer any uncommitted
federal infrastructure funds to municipalities, through a temporary top-up of the
Gas Tax Fund. This will ensure that no committed infrastructure money is allowed
to lapse, but is instead always invested in our communities.

14   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 CANADA
INFRASTRUCTURE
BANK

We will establish the Canadian Infrastructure Bank to provide low-cost
financing for new infrastructure projects.
The federal government can use its strong credit rating and lending authority to
make it easier and more affordable for municipalities to build the projects their
communities need.
Where a lack of capital represents a barrier to projects, the Canada Infrastructure
Bank will provide loan guarantees and small capital contributions to provinces
and municipalities to ensure that the projects are built.

JOB AND SKILLS
TRAINING

We will help Canadians get the training they need to find and keep good jobs.
In a changing economy, Canadians need more opportunities to improve their
skills and upgrade their credentials. We will make it easier for adults to access
training programs by increasing investment in skills training.
To help those receiving Employment Insurance get the training they need to
rejoin the workforce, we will invest $500 million more each year in provincial and
territorial Labour Market Development Agreements.
To help those who do not qualify for Employment Insurance or are not currently
employed, we will invest an additional $200 million in training programs led by
the provinces and territories.
We will also invest $50 million to renew and expand funding to the Aboriginal
Skills and Employment Training Strategy, and provide $25 million each year for
training facilities, delivered in partnership with labour unions.
We will work with employers and workers to determine an appropriate
apprenticeship ratio for all federal infrastructure projects.
Our total investment of an additional $775 million per year for job and skills
training will help Canadians get the training they need to find and keep good
jobs.

JOBS AND
INNOVATION

We will kick-start investment in innovation to grow our economy and create
good, middle class jobs.
To get our economy growing again, we need to immediately invest in helping
our businesses and entrepreneurs – including those in manufacturing – become
more innovative, competitive, and successful.
Over the next three years, we will:
• 

invest $200 million each year in a new Innovation Agenda to significantly
expand support for incubators and accelerators, as well as the emerging
national network for business innovation and cluster support; and

15   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 • 

AGRICULTURE

invest an additional $100 million each year in the Industrial Research
Assistance Program, which has a proven track record of helping smalland medium-sized businesses to innovate and become world leaders.

We will help Canada’s agriculture sector be more innovative, safer, and
stronger.
Canada’s farmers and ranchers are the foundation of our food sector. The work
that they do to feed Canada and the world is vital, but government support
is needed to help them with challenges ranging from transportation to water
management to research and food safety.
To attract investment and create good jobs in food processing, we will invest $160
million, over four years, in an Agri-Food Value Added Investment Fund. This will
provide technical and marketing assistance to help food processors develop new
value-added products that reflect changing tastes and market opportunities.
To support innovation in the agricultural sector, we will invest an additional $100
million, over four years, in agricultural research. To better allocate research
funding, we will establish a transparent process that involves food producers.
We will invest an additional $80 million, over four years, in the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency for more food safety inspections of domestic and imported
foods.
We will continue to defend Canadian interests during trade negotiations,
including supply management.
We will also work with provinces, territories, and other willing partners, to
better address water and soil conservation and development issues, including
investments in appropriate infrastructure.

LABOUR UNIONS

We will restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important
role of unions in Canada.
Labour unions play an important role in protecting the rights of workers and
growing the middle class.
Under Stephen Harper, many of the fundamental labour rights that unions have
worked so hard to secure have been rolled back, making it more difficult for
workers to organize freely, bargain collectively in good faith, and work in safe
environments.
We will restore fair and balanced labour laws that acknowledge the important
role of unions in Canada, and respect their importance in helping the middle class
grow and prosper. This begins with repealing Bills C-377 and C-525, legislation
that diminishes and weakens Canada’s labour movement.

16   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 Changes to labour laws should be based on evidence, not ideology, and made
after legitimate consultation with unions.
We will reinstate a modernized and inclusive fair wages policy for federal
procurement.
We are strongly committed to supporting and protecting workers’ rights, and as
government, we will bargain in good faith with Canada’s public sector unions.

LABOUR-SPONSORED
FUNDS

We will reinstate the tax credit for contributions made to labour-sponsored
funds, to help support economic growth and help Canadians save for their
retirement.
In many parts of the country, labour-sponsored funds are used to help smalland medium-sized businesses get off the ground, creating jobs and economic
growth. In Quebec, they also serve as an important retirement savings vehicle.
There, labour-sponsored funds help 650,000 workers save for retirement, while
investing in Canada’s entrepreneurs.
Even though we need to do more to encourage investment in new, job-creating
businesses, and more to help Canadians save for their retirement, the Harper
Convervatives are phasing out the tax credit for investments in labour-sponsored
funds.
We will immediately reinstate the tax credit in full.

17   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 HELP THAT WORKS FOR
MODERN CANADIAN FAMILIES
For most Canadians, balancing work and family life is a daily
challenge. As families change and adapt, so too should government.
It is time for programs and benefits that truly work for modern
Canadian families.

MORE FLEXIBILITY FOR
PARENTS

We will make parental benefits more flexible.
Every family’s needs are different. Canadian parents deserve a parental
benefits plan that is flexible and able to adjust to their unique family and work
circumstances.
We will introduce more flexible parental benefits that will:

Sam and Jason adopted twins and
want to split the use of parental
benefits so that they can each
spend time with their children.
Our plan will allow them to split
a longer leave in a combination
that works best for them.

• 

allow parents to receive benefits in smaller blocks of time over a period
of up to 18 months; and

• 

make it possible for parents to take a longer leave – up to 18 months
when combined with maternity beneﬁts – at a lower beneﬁt level.

We will work with the provinces and territories to amend their labour codes, to
reflect these new federal benefits.
This more flexible plan will benefit more Canadians, representing an investment
of $125 million per year in the economic security of Canadian families.

18   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 SUPPORTING
CAREGIVERS

We will make the compassionate care benefit easier to access, more flexible,
and more inclusive.
Millions of Canadians provide compassionate care for seriously ill family
members, but the benefits available through Employment Insurance can be
difficult to access.
We will introduce a more flexible and inclusive benefit available to any Canadian
who provides care to a seriously ill family member.
This expanded benefit will:
• 

be easier to access – applicants will still be expected to submit a medical
certificate in order to qualify, but the benefit will be more inclusive;

• 

be more flexible – caregivers can claim the benefit in blocks of time
over a year-long period, and family members can share the six months of
benefits; and

• 

be more inclusive – for example, those caring for a seriously ill adult
family member who needs care beyond what can be provided during
evenings and weekends, or those caring for a seriously ill child who
cannot attend school for an extended period of time, will no longer be
excluded from the benefit.

This enhanced compassionate care benefit represents an investment of $190
million per year in supporting Canada’s compassionate caregivers.

FLEXIBLE WORKING
CONDITIONS

We will make it easier for federally regulated workers to request more
flexible working conditions.
Every family struggles with balancing work responsibilities and busy lives at
home.
Leading by example, we will amend the Canada Labour Code to provide every
federally regulated worker with the legal right to make a formal request to their
employer – without fear of reprisal – for more ﬂexible working conditions, such
as ﬂexible start and ﬁnish times, or the ability to work from home.
Similar to the system in place in the United Kingdom, where the vast majority of
requests have been approved, employers will be required to formally respond to
these requests.
We will also work with interested provinces and territories so that they can offer
the same rights to workers under their jurisdiction.

19   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 EMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE
Mark is a seasonally employed
worker in New Brunswick’s
lobster fishery. Under our plan,
when his seasonal work comes
to an end and he applies for
Employment Insurance, he will
only lose one week’s worth of
income, not two. This will put
hundreds of dollars more in his
pocket at a time when he needs
it most.

We will fix Employment Insurance to better serve Canadians now, and help
boost Canada’s economic growth now and in the long-term.
Employment Insurance provides economic security to Canadians when they
need it most. Those who have lost their jobs, through no fault of their own, or are
out of work to raise children, provide care for a loved one, or get needed skills
training, should not struggle to get the support they need.
We will strengthen the Employment Insurance system to make sure that it works
for our economy and for all Canadians.
Starting in 2017, we will reduce the waiting period for benefits. When a worker
loses their job and applies for Employment Insurance, they will only be without
income for one week, not two.
We will also reverse Stephen Harper’s 2012 EI reforms that force unemployed
workers to move away from their communities and take lower-paying jobs.
We will ensure that the Employment Insurance system is providing real income
security to workers, including those with precarious work.

CHILD CARE

We will develop a child care framework that meets the needs of Canadian
families, wherever they live.
Child care needs vary from family to family, and provinces and territories have
responded to these needs in different ways. A one-size-fits all national program
– particularly one that imposes pre-determined costs on other orders of
government – is impractical and unfair.
We will meet with provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities to begin
work on a new National Early Learning and Child Care Framework, to deliver
affordable, high-quality, flexible, and fully inclusive child care for Canadian
families. This work will begin in the first 100 days of a Liberal government and will
be funded through our investments in social infrastructure.
The framework we design together will be administered in collaboration with,
and in respect of, provincial jurisdictions.

HEALTHIER KIDS

We will do our part to help Canadian children live healthier lives, with less
exposure to known health risks.
To help families make better food choices, we will:
• 

introduce new restrictions on the commercial marketing of unhealthy
food and beverages to children, similar to those now in place in Quebec;

• 

bring in tougher regulations to eliminate trans fats, similar to those in the
U.S., and to reduce salt in processed foods; and

20   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 • 

improve food labels to give more information on added sugars and
artificial dyes in processed foods.

To help Canadian children avoid and manage known health risks, we will increase
funding to the Public Health Agency of Canada by $15 million in each of the
next two years, to support a national strategy to increase vaccination rates and
raise awareness for parents, coaches, and athletes on concussion treatment.
This will be based on the best science and will support existing provincial and
territorial efforts.
We will introduce plain packaging requirements for tobacco products, similar to
those in Australia and the United Kingdom.

HELPING EDUCATORS

We will introduce a new tax benefit to help teachers and early childhood
educators with the cost of school supplies.
Teachers and early childhood educators work hard to provide a positive learning
environment for our children, often paying out-of-pocket for classroom supplies.
It is a generous gesture that is not currently recognized by our federal tax system.
To help offset these costs, we will introduce a new Teacher and Early Childhood
Educator School Supply Tax Benefit. This new benefit will apply to the purchase
of up to $1,000 worth of school supplies each year, providing a cash benefit of up
to $150 each year for licensed and certified teachers and educators, starting in
the 2015 tax year.
Because this benefit will operate as a refundable tax credit, all educators who
have purchased educational materials qualify, regardless of their income level.

CANADA’S NORTH

We will invest in Canada’s North, to help northern Canadians with the high
cost of living, and help our northern economies grow.
Canada’s North is a vast and beautiful part of the world, home to a rich culture
and tremendous economic potential. Because of its isolation, however, it is also a
very expensive place to live.
The Northern Residents Deduction was designed to help mitigate these higher
costs, and help attract workers to the North. Unfortunately, the deduction
amount has not kept pace with inflation, making its help less valuable to those
who need it.
To help northern residents with higher costs of living, and to help our northern
economies grow, we will increase the residency component of the deduction by
33 percent to a maximum of $22 per day. We will also index this benefit so that it
keeps pace with inflation.
To ensure that northern families have access to affordable, healthy food, we will

21   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 increase investments in the Nutrition North program by $40 million, over four
years. We will also work with northern and remote communities to ensure that
the program is more transparent, effective, and accountable to northerners and
other Canadians.
As part of new, ten-year investments in social infrastructure and green
infrastructure, we will prioritize investment in affordable housing and climate
change preparedness, both of which are important to the quality of life for
northern Canadians.
For residents in Canada’s Northern Zone, our enhanced Northern Residents
Deduction will provide a new annual maximum deduction of $8,000 per year,
from the $6,022 currently available.
Those living in the Intermediate Zone will see their annual maximum deduction
rise to $4,000 from $3,011 per year.
In total, this enhanced deduction represents a $50 million annual tax savings
for Northern Canadians.

22   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 1: GROWTH FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS

 
4

?3
1:4

Fair and Open
Government

 

OPEN AND TRANSPARENT
GOVERNMENT
It is time to shine more light on government and ensure that it
remains focused on the people it is meant to serve. Government and
its information should be open by default. Data paid for by Canadians
belongs to Canadians. We will restore trust in our democracy, and that begins
with trusting Canadians.

ACCESS TO
INFORMATION

We will make government information more accessible.
Government data and information should be open by default, in formats that are
modern and easy to use. We will update the Access to Information Act to meet this
standard.
We will make it easier for Canadians to access information by eliminating all fees,
except for the initial $5 filing fee.
We will expand the role of the Information Commissioner, giving them the power
to issue binding orders for disclosure.
We will ensure that Access to Information applies to the Prime Minister’s and
Ministers’ Offices, as well as administrative institutions that support Parliament
and the courts.
To ensure that the system continues to serve Canadians, we will undertake a full
legislative review of the Access to Information Act every five years.

24   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 PERSONAL
INFORMATION

We will make it easier for Canadians to access their own personal information.
Canadians have a right to access their personal information held by the
government.
To make accessing this information faster, less complicated, and more affordable,
we will create a simple, central, no-fee website for personal information requests.
We will back this up with a 30-day guarantee: should a request take longer than
30 days to fulfill, government must provide a written explanation for the delay to
the applicant and the Privacy Commissioner.

OPEN DATA

OPEN PARLIAMENT

We will embrace open data.
We will accelerate and expand open data initiatives, and will make government
data available digitally, so that Canadians can easily access and use it.

We will disclose Parliamentary expenses and make Parliament open by
default.
The Liberal Party was the first to require its members to proactively disclose
travel and hospitality expenses. It is time for all Parliamentarians to do the same.
We will make government more accountable by requiring all Parliamentarians to
disclose their expenses in a common and detailed manner, each quarter.
We will end the secrecy surrounding the Board of Internal Economy – the group
responsible for regulating spending by Members of Parliament. Except in rare
cases requiring confidentiality, meetings of this group will be open to the public.

25   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 OPEN AND FAIR ELECTIONS
Restoring integrity to our electoral process will improve the fairness
of our elections, and help to renew Canadians’ faith in government.

GOVERNMENT
ADVERTISING

We will ban partisan government ads.
The federal government should use advertising to promote government
programs, not partisan agendas.
We will appoint an Advertising Commissioner to help the Auditor General
oversee government advertising. The Commissioner will review proposed
messages to ensure that they are non-partisan and represent a legitimate public
service announcement.

FAIR ELECTIONS

We will protect the integrity of our elections and encourage more Canadians
to vote.
Fair elections are the cornerstone of democracy.
We will give Elections Canada the resources it needs to investigate voter fraud
and vote suppression, illegal financing, and other threats to free and fair elections.
We will help encourage more Canadians to vote, by removing restrictions on the
ways in which the Chief Electoral Officer and Elections Canada can communicate
with voters.

26   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 Any incident of electoral fraud must be prosecuted. To that end, we will restore
the independence of the Commissioner of Canada Elections, so that they are
accountable to Parliament and not the government of the day.

POLITICAL FINANCING

We will close political financing loopholes.
When fixed election date legislation was introduced, it left a loophole that allows
unlimited spending in the period before an election is called. That creates an
uneven playing field.
We will review the limits on how much political parties can spend during elections,
and ensure that spending between elections is subject to limits as well.

LEADERS’ DEBATES

We will establish an independent commission to organize leaders’ debates.
Elections are a time for Canadians to learn more about political parties, their
leaders, and their policies. When it comes to leaders’ debates, the focus should
be on educating and engaging Canadians, not on twisting the rules for political
advantage.
We will establish an independent commission to organize leaders’ debates and
bring an end to partisan gamesmanship.

ELECTORAL REFORM

We will make every vote count.
We are committed to ensuring that 2015 will be the last federal election
conducted under the first-past-the-post voting system.
We will convene an all-party Parliamentary committee to review a wide variety
of reforms, such as ranked ballots, proportional representation, mandatory
voting, and online voting.
This committee will deliver its recommendations to Parliament. Within 18
months of forming government, we will introduce legislation to enact electoral
reform.

YOUNG CANADIANS

We will engage with first-time voters and encourage more Canadians to vote.
Every young person should be registered to vote when they turn 18. We will
work with interested provinces and territories, and Elections Canada, to register
young Canadians as a part of their high school or CEGEP curriculum.

27   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 To ensure that no young person loses the opportunity to vote, we will mandate
Elections Canada to stay in contact with them if they change addresses
after graduation.
Finally, to encourage more voter participation, we will support Elections Canada
in proactively registering Canadians from groups that historically have lower
turnout, such as students.

EASIER VOTING,
STRONGER
PUNISHMENTS FOR
LAW BREAKERS

We will make it easier for Canadians to vote, and harder for election
lawbreakers to evade punishment.
We will repeal the anti-democratic elements in Stephen Harper’s Fair Elections
Act, which make it harder for Canadians to vote and easier for election
lawbreakers to evade punishment.
We will restore the voter identification card as an acceptable form
of identification.
We will also increase penalties so that there are real deterrents for deliberately
breaking our election laws.

28   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 GIVING CANADIANS A VOICE
IN OTTAWA
For Parliament to work best, its members must be free to do what
they have been elected to do: represent their communities and hold
the government to account. Government must always stay focused on
serving Canadians and solving their problems.

SENATE REFORM

We will bring real change to the Senate.
The status quo is not an option: the Senate needs to change. We need to end the
partisan nature of the Senate.
We also believe that government should focus its efforts on the priorities of
Canadians, not on more rounds of constitutional negotiations.
We will create a new, non-partisan, merit-based process to advise the Prime
Minister on Senate appointments.

QUESTION PERIOD

We will reform Question Period so that all members, including the Prime
Minister, are held to greater account.
As the head of government, the Prime Minister represents all Canadians and
should be directly accountable to all Canadians. We will introduce a Prime
Minister’s Question Period to improve that level of direct accountability.

29   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 We will also empower the Speaker to challenge and sanction members during
Question Period, and allow more time for questions and answers.
We will look at other ways to make Question Period more relevant, including the
use of online technologies, and will work with all parties to recommend and bring
about these changes.

FREE VOTES

We will make free votes in the House of Commons standard practice.
We will give Canadians a stronger voice in the House of Commons by limiting the
circumstances in which Liberal Members of Parliament will be required to vote
with Cabinet.
For members of the Liberal Caucus, all votes will be free votes with the
exception of:

PROROGATION AND
OMNIBUS BILLS

• 

those that implement the Liberal electoral platform;

• 

traditional confidence matters, like the budget; and

• 

those that address our shared values and the protections guaranteed by
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

We will not resort to legislative tricks to avoid scrutiny.
Stephen Harper has used prorogation to avoid difficult political circumstances.
We will not.
Stephen Harper has also used omnibus bills to prevent Parliament from properly
reviewing and debating his proposals. We will change the House of Commons
Standing Orders to bring an end to this undemocratic practice.

GOVERNMENT
WATCHDOGS

SUPREME COURT
APPOINTMENTS

We will not interfere with the work of government watchdogs.
Our Officers of Parliament do important work in helping Canadians. We will
ensure that all of the officers are properly funded and accountable only to
Parliament, not the government of the day.

We will make the Supreme Court appointment process more transparent.
Under Stephen Harper, the all-party Supreme Court appointment process
has been disrespected and degraded, culminating in the Prime Minister’s
unprecedented attacks on the Chief Justice.

30   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 We will restore dignity and respect to the relationship between government and
the Supreme Court. We will work with all parties in the House of Commons to
ensure that the process of appointing Supreme Court Justices is transparent,
inclusive, and accountable to Canadians.
We will ensure that the process involves proper consultation with authorities
throughout the legal profession, including the provinces, provincial law societies,
provincial appellate and superior courts, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court. We will ensure that all those appointed to the Supreme Court are
functionally bilingual.

PARLIAMENTARY
BUDGET OFFICER

We will make the Parliamentary Budget Officer truly independent.
The decisions that government makes must always be based on the latest, most
accurate information available. That includes information about the state of the
nation’s finances.
To make sure that we have the best information on hand, we will ensure that the
Parliamentary Budget Officer is truly independent of the government. We will
make sure that the office is properly funded, and accountable only – and directly
– to Parliament, not the government of the day.
To help Canadians make informed decisions during elections, we will also add
the costing of party platforms to the Parliamentary Budget Officer’s mandate.
Starting with the next election, Canadians will have a credible, non-partisan way
to compare each party’s fiscal plans.

FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT

We will provide better oversight of taxpayer dollars.
Canadians understand the importance of saving, spending, and borrowing
responsibly. Our government should hold itself to the same standard.
We will change Parliament’s financial processes so that government accounting
is more consistent and clear. We will ensure accounting consistency between
the Estimates and the Public Accounts, provide costing analysis for all proposed
legislation, and require the government to receive Parliament’s approval on
borrowing plans.

NATIONAL SECURITY
OVERSIGHT

We will deliver stronger national security oversight.
At present, Parliament does not have oversight of our national security agencies,
making Canada the sole nation among our Five Eyes allies whose elected officials
cannot scrutinize security operations. This leaves the public uninformed and
unrepresented on critical issues.

31   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 We will create an all-party committee to monitor and oversee the operations of
every government department and agency with national security responsibilities.

PARLIAMENTARY
COMMITTEES

We will strengthen Parliamentary committees so that they can better
scrutinize legislation.
Better government starts with better ideas. We will ensure that Parliamentary
committees are properly resourced to bring in expert witnesses, and are
sufficiently staffed to continue to provide reliable, non-partisan research.
To increase accountability, we will strengthen the role of Parliamentary
committee chairs, including elections by secret ballot.
We will also change the rules so that Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries no
longer have a vote on committees.

32   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 BETTER SERVICE FOR
CANADIANS
In a digital era, Canadians have high standards for the service they
receive. Dealing with the government should be no exception. Better
service for Canadians would mean faster service, delivered in a way that
makes citizens feel respected and valued.

CANADA REVENUE
AGENCY

We will make the Canada Revenue Agency fairer, more helpful, and easier
to use.
The Canada Revenue Agency exists to serve Canadians. We will overhaul its
service model so that people who interact with the CRA feel like valued clients,
not just taxpayers.
A client-focused Canada Revenue Agency will:
• 

proactively contact Canadians who are entitled to, but are not receiving,
tax benefits;

• 

offer to complete returns for some clients, particularly lower-income
Canadians and those on fixed incomes whose financial situation is
unchanged year-to-year;

• 

support more Canadians who wish to file taxes using no paper forms; and

• 

deliver correspondence that is straightforward and easy to read.

33   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 We will allow charities to do their work on behalf of Canadians free from political
harassment, and will modernize the rules governing the charitable and not-forprofit sectors.
This will include clarifying the rules governing “political activity,” with an
understanding that charities make an important contribution to public debate
and public policy. A new legislative framework to strengthen the sector will
emerge from this process.
We will also invest an additional $80 million, over four years, to help the Canada
Revenue Agency crack down on tax evaders.

CANADA POST

We will save home mail delivery.
By ending door-to-door mail delivery, Stephen Harper is asking Canadians to pay
more for less service. That is unacceptable.
We will stop Stephen Harper’s plan to end door-to-door mail delivery in Canada
and undertake a new review of Canada Post to make sure that it provides highquality service at a reasonable price to Canadians, no matter where they live.

DIVERSITY IN
GOVERNMENT

We will build a government as diverse as Canada.
Our country is stronger, and our government more effective, when decisionmakers reflect Canada’s diversity.
We will include an equal number of women and men in our Cabinet.
We will also adopt a new government-wide appointment process that is open
and based on merit.

YOUNG PEOPLE

We will involve young people in government.
At its highest levels, our government needs to do a better job of understanding
and addressing the needs of Canada’s young people.
We will create a Prime Minister’s Youth Advisory Council, consisting of young
Canadians aged 16 to 24, to provide non-partisan advice to the Prime Minister
on issues facing the country.

34   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 GENDER IMPACTS

We will consider the gender impacts of the decisions we make.
Public policies affect women and men in different ways. We will take these
differences into account when making decisions in Cabinet.
We will also ensure that federal departments are conducting the gender-based
impact analyses that have been required of them for the past 20 years.

ONLINE SERVICES

We will deliver easy online access to government services.
Accessing government services online should be easier. We will make the process
easier and faster through individualized, secure accounts for Canadians who
want to access their benefits and review key documents.
We will also create a single online point-of-contact for all government services,
and work with the provinces and territories on ways to combine online access.
As we expand online services, we will also expand in-person service, such as
reopening the nine veterans’ service centres closed by Stephen Harper.
Finally, we will work with the Privacy Commissioner as we develop these new
initiatives, to ensure that Canadians’ data is kept safe and secure.

QUALITY OF SERVICE

We will establish new performance standards for federal services.
Busy Canadians deserve better service from their government. We will establish
new performance standards, including streamlining applications, reducing wait
times, and offering money-back guarantees.
Performance will be independently assessed and publicly reported. We will start
with the services hardest hit by years of cuts by Stephen Harper: Employment
Insurance, veterans’ services, immigration, and EI and CPP appeals.
We will also ensure that all federal services are delivered in full compliance with
the Official Languages Act.

YOUR VOICE

We will involve Canadians in policy-making.
Technology makes it easier for citizens and government to share ideas and
information.
We will explore new ways to use technology to crowdsource policy ideas from
citizens.

35   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 EVIDENCE-BASED POLICY
Government should base its policies on facts, not make up facts
to suit a preferred policy. Common sense, good policy, and evidence
about what works should guide the decisions that government makes.

SCIENCE AND
SCIENTISTS

THE LONG-FORM
CENSUS

We will value science and treat scientists with respect.
We will appoint a Chief Science Officer who will ensure that government science
is fully available to the public, that scientists are able to speak freely about their
work, and that scientific analyses are considered when the government makes
decisions.

We will restore the long-form census.
Without accurate and reliable data, Canada’s communities cannot plan ahead.
Everything from transit planning to housing strategies to support for new
Canadians becomes more difficult.
We will immediately restore the mandatory long-form census, to give
communities the information they need to best serve Canadians.

36   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

 STATISTICS CANADA

We will make Statistics Canada fully independent.
Data collected by Statistics Canada helps the private sector, government, not-for
profit groups, and researchers make better decisions.
We will make Statistics Canada fully independent. We will work with Statistics
Canada and other stakeholders to provide a broader range of information,
including detailed labour market information, child development data, and
statistics about our population.

MAKING DECISIONS

We will make decisions using the best data available and will invest only in
programs proven to offer good value.
Responsible governments rely on sound data to make their decisions. We will
release to the public key information that informs the decisions we make.
We will devote a fixed percentage of program funds to experimenting with new
approaches to existing problems. We will measure our results and encourage
innovation to continuously improve the services government provides to
Canadians.
We will use accurate data to make good decisions. We will stop funding initiatives
that are no longer effective and invest program dollars in those that are of
good value.

37   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 2: FAIR AND OPEN GOVERNMENT

  

CHAPTER THREE

A Clean Environment
and a Strong Economy

A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT
AND A STRONG ECONOMY
Canadians want a government they can trust to protect the
environment and grow the economy. Stephen Harper has done
neither. Our plan will deliver the economic growth and jobs Canadians
need, and leave to our children and grandchildren a country even more
beautiful, more sustainable, and more prosperous than the one we have now.

CLIMATE CHANGE

We will provide national leadership and join with the provinces and territories
to take action on climate change, put a price on carbon, and reduce carbon
pollution.
Climate change is an immediate and significant threat to our communities and
our economy. Stephen Harper has had nearly a decade to take action on climate
change but has failed to do so. His lack of leadership has tarnished Canada’s
reputation abroad, making it harder for Canadian businesses to compete.
The provinces and territories recognize the need to act now, and have already
begun to price carbon and take action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. We
will end the cycle of federal parties – of all stripes – setting arbitrary targets
without a real federal/provincial/territorial plan in place.
We will instead partner with provincial and territorial leaders to develop real
climate change solutions, consistent with our international obligations to
protect the planet, all while growing our economy. Together, we will attend the
Paris climate conference, and within 90 days formally meet to establish a panCanadian framework for combatting climate change.

39   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

 We will work together to establish national emissions-reduction targets, and
ensure that the provinces and territories have targeted federal funding and the
flexibility to design their own policies to meet these commitments, including their
own carbon pricing policies.
These targets must recognise the economic cost and catastrophic impact that
a greater-than-two-degree increase in average global temperatures would
represent, as well as the need for Canada to do its part to prevent that from
happening.
Partnering with the provinces and territories, we will create a new Low Carbon
Economy Trust. The Trust will provide funding to projects that materially reduce
carbon emissions under the new pan-Canadian framework. We will endow the
Low Carbon Economy Trust with $2 billion in our mandate.
We will protect our communities from the challenges of climate change and grow
our economy by making significant new investments in green infrastructure.
We will fulfill our G20 commitment and phase out subsidies for the fossil fuel
industry over the medium-term.
We will also work in partnership with the United States and Mexico to develop an
ambitious North American clean energy and environmental agreement.

CLEAN JOBS

We will make it easier and more financially rewarding for Canadian businesses
to invest in creating clean jobs.
Clean technology can deliver real benefits for our environment and our economy,
including more good, middle class jobs.
We will invest $100 million more each year in clean technology producers, so that
they can tackle Canada’s most pressing environmental challenges, and create
more opportunities for Canadian workers.
We will deliver more support to emerging clean tech manufacturing companies,
making it easier for them to conduct research and bring new products to market.
We will also invest $200 million more each year to support innovation and the
use of clean technologies in our natural resource sectors, including the forestry,
fisheries, mining, energy, and agricultural sectors.
To support both large- and community-scale renewable energy projects, the new
Canada Infrastructure Bank will issue Green Bonds to fund projects like electric
vehicle charging stations and networks, transmission lines for renewable energy,
building retrofits, and clean power storage.
We will enhance existing tax measures to generate more clean technology
investments, and work with the provinces and territories to make Canada
the world’s most competitive tax jurisdiction for investments in the research,
development, and manufacturing of clean technology.

40   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

 We will deliver a better quality of life for all Canadians by working with the
provinces to set stronger air quality standards, monitor emissions, and provide
incentives for investments that lead to cleaner air and healthier communities.
As the country’s single largest
employer, customer, and landlord,
we will lead by example and
increase government use of
clean technologies. This will
boost domestic demand for clean
technology, support entrepreneurs,
and fuel new jobs.
We will improve energy efficiency
standards for consumer and
commercial products, and use
new financing instruments to
encourage investments in energysaving retrofits to Canada’s
industrial,
commercial,
and
residential buildings.

CANADA HAS

LOST
71%
OF ITS CLEAN TECH MARKET
SHARE DURING THE
HARPER DECADE

OUR NEW GLOBAL RANK?
We will provide more support for
our clean technology companies to
successfully export their products
by training trade officials and
Source: analyse des conseillers
leading trade missions focused on
clean technology. These companies
will also be provided with useful training, data, and technical assistance on export
opportunities in a more coordinated way.

19TH

We will look for ways for government to be an “early adopter” of emerging green
technologies, and will support clean transportation by adding electric vehicle
charging stations at federal parking lots, and rapidly expanding the federal fleet
of electric vehicles.
To foster the creativity that leads to cutting-edge research, we will establish
Canada Research Chairs in sustainable technology.
We will also work closely with the provinces and territories to develop a Canadian
Energy Strategy to protect Canada’s energy security; encourage energy
conservation; and bring cleaner, renewable energy onto the electricity grid.

ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENTS

We will make environmental assessments credible again.
Resource-based projects can create jobs and spur investment, but success
depends on regaining public trust.

41   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

 Canadians must be able to trust that government will engage in appropriate
regulatory oversight, including credible environmental assessments, and that it
will respect the rights of those most affected, such as Indigenous communities.
While governments grant permits for resource development, only communities
can grant permission.
We will immediately review Canada’s environmental assessment processes and
introduce new, fair processes that will:
• 

restore robust oversight and thorough environmental assessments of
areas under federal jurisdiction, while also working with provinces and
territories to avoid duplication;

• 

ensure that decisions are based on science, facts, and evidence, and serve
the public’s interest;

• 

provide ways for Canadians to express their views and opportunities for
experts to meaningfully participate; and

• 

require project advocates to choose the best technologies available to
reduce environmental impacts.

We will modernize the National Energy Board, ensuring that its composition
reflects regional views and has sufficient expertise in fields like environmental
science, community development, and Indigenous traditional knowledge.
We will end the practice of having federal Ministers interfere in the environmental
assessment process.
We will also ensure that environmental assessments include an analysis of
upstream impacts and greenhouse gas emissions resulting from projects
under review.
We will undertake, in full partnership and consultation with First Nations, Inuit,
and the Métis Nation, a full review of laws, policies, and operational practices. This
will ensure that on project reviews and assessments, the Crown is fully executing
its consultation, accommodation, and consent obligations, in accordance
with its constitutional and international human rights obligations, including
Aboriginal and Treaty rights and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples.
We recognize the relationship between Indigenous Peoples and the land, and will
respect legal traditions and perspectives on environmental stewardship.
Stephen Harper’s changes to the Fisheries Act, and his elimination of the Navigable
Waters Protection Act, have weakened environmental protections. We will
review these changes, restore lost protections, and incorporate more modern
safeguards.
We will also do more to protect Canada’s endangered species. We will respond

42   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

 more quickly to the advice and requests of scientists, and will complete robust
species-at-risk recovery plans.

WATER

We will protect our freshwater and oceans.
Canada is uniquely blessed with an abundance of freshwater, and marine and
coastal areas that are not only ecologically diverse, but also economically
significant: our ocean-based industries contribute nearly $40 billion each year to
the Canadian economy.
To protect these valuable natural resources, we will deliver more robust and
credible environmental assessments for all projects that could impact our
freshwater and oceans.
Freshwater
We will treat our freshwater as a precious resource that deserves protection and
careful stewardship. We will work with other orders of government to protect
Canada’s freshwater using education, geo-mapping, watershed protection, and
investments in the best wastewater treatment technologies.
To protect our freshwater ecosystems, we will renew our commitment to protect
the Great Lakes, the St. Lawrence River Basin, and the Lake Winnipeg Basin. We
will also act on the recommendations of the Cohen Commission on restoring
sockeye salmon stocks in the Fraser River.
To aid in making the best possible decisions, we will restore $1.5 million in
annual federal funding for freshwater research – a program that was cut by the
Conservatives – and make new investments in Canada’s world-leading IISD
Experimental Lakes Area.
GREENLAND

Oceans
Stephen Harper’s failure to meet
our international commitments
to protect marine and coastal
areas puts these areas and our
international reputation at risk.
We will make up for Conservative
inaction and increase the amount of
Canada’s marine and coastal areas
that are protected – to five percent
by 2017, and ten percent by 2020.
To help achieve this, we will invest
$8 million per year in community
consultation and science.

36.7%

AUSTRALIA

33.2%

UNITED STATES
NEW ZEALAND
RUSSIA

30.4%
16.6%

11.6%

INDONESIA 5.8%
JAPAN 5.6%
NORWAY 2.8%
PHILIPPINES 2.5%
CANADA 1.3%

% PROTECTED OCEAN ESTATE BY COUNTRY
Source: Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society

43   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

 We will also directly invest in ocean science. Stephen Harper cut $40 million from
the federal ocean science and monitoring programs. We will restore that funding
so that we can protect the health of our fish stocks, monitor contaminants and
pollution in our oceans, and support responsible and sustainable aquaculture
industries on our coasts.
We will use scientific evidence and the precautionary principle, and take into
account climate change, when making decisions affecting fish stocks and
ecosystem management.
And we will do a better job of co-managing our oceans, by working with the
provinces, territories, Indigenous Peoples, and other stakeholders. Together,
we will develop plans that make the best use of our marine resources and give
coastal communities more say in managing the resources around them.

NATIONAL PARKS

We will preserve and promote Canada’s National Parks.
Canada’s National Parks belong to all Canadians. They are also an important part
of local economies, generating nearly $5 billion each year and helping to employ
65,000 people.
We will make it more affordable for more Canadians to visit and appreciate our
National Parks.
• 

In 2017, the 150th anniversary of Confederation, admission for all visitors
to National Parks will be free.

• 

Beginning in 2018, admission for children under 18 will be free, and any
adult who has become a Canadian citizen in the previous 12 months will
be given one year’s free admission.

• 

Through an expanded Learn to Camp program, more low- and middleincome families will have an opportunity to experience Canada’s
outdoors.

To protect ecosystems and species at risk, we will invest $25 million each year to
develop Canada’s National Parks system, as well as manage and expand National
Wildlife Areas and Migratory Bird Sanctuaries.
We will protect our National Parks by limiting development within them, and
where possible, we will work with nearby communities to help grow local ecotourism industries and create jobs.
We will reverse Stephen Harper’s cuts to Parks Canada, which cut more than
$25 million from programs and services, and made it more difficult for Canadians
to experience our National Parks and learn more about our environment and our
heritage.
We will work with the Ontario government to create the country’s first urban
National Park – Rouge National Park – including improved legislation to protect
this important ecosystem and guide how the park will be managed.
44   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 3: A CLEAN ENVIRONMENT AND A STRONG ECONOMY

  

CHAPTER FOUR

AStrong Canada

A RENEWED RELATIONSHIP
WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
The relationship between Canada and Indigenous Peoples is vitally
important – not just to our shared economic interests, but to our
respective identities as nations. It is time for a renewed relationship based
on trust, respect, and a true spirit of cooperation.

A NEW NATION-TONATION PROCESS

We will renew the relationship between Canada and Indigenous Peoples.
It is time for Canada to have a renewed, nation-to-nation relationship with
Indigenous Peoples, based on recognition, rights, respect, co-operation, and
partnership. This is both the right thing to do and a sure path to economic growth.
We will immediately re-engage in a renewed nation-to-nation process with
Indigenous Peoples to make progress on the issues most important to First
Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit communities – issues like housing,
infrastructure, health and mental health care, community safety and policing,
child welfare, and education.
As part of this renewed relationship, we will do more to make sure that the voices
of Indigenous Peoples are heard in Ottawa.
As Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau will meet with First Nations, Métis Nation, and
Inuit leaders each and every year of a Liberal government mandate.
Stephen Harper’s changes to the Canada Elections Act make it harder for
Indigenous Peoples to exercise their right to vote. We will repeal those changes.

46   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 Finally, we will ensure that the Kelowna Accord – and the spirit of reconciliation
that drove it – is embraced, and its objectives implemented in a manner that
meets today’s challenges.

A NEW FISCAL
RELATIONSHIP

We will expand investment in First Nations communities and work toward
forging a new fiscal relationship with First Nations.
For nearly 20 years, investments in First Nations programs have been subject to a
two percent cap on annual funding increases. As a result, federal funding has not
kept up with population growth and inflation in First Nations communities.
We will immediately lift the two percent cap on funding for First Nations
programs and work to establish a new fiscal relationship that gives First Nations
communities sufficient, predictable, and sustained funding. Increasing First
Nations’ own source revenues, whether through revenue sharing or other
mechanisms, will be a priority.
As part of this new fiscal relationship, we will also make sure that all First Nations
receive equitable funding for child and family services provided on reserves.

FIRST NATIONS
EDUCATION

We will work with First Nations to make sure that every First Nations child
receives a quality education.
It is vital to Canadians’ shared success that we work together to ensure better
economic outcomes for First Nations. This starts with education.
Chronic underfunding of the First Nations education system has held First
Nations students back: they are behind provincial peers in reading, writing, and
numeracy. Today, less than half of students on reserves graduate from high school.
To help close the funding gap and improve outcomes for First Nations students,
we will invest new funding each year in core funding for kindergarten through
grade 12 programs. This will include money committed by Stephen Harper that
has yet to flow, plus an additional $300 million per year in incremental funding,
totalling $750 million per year by the end of our first mandate. Over the next
four years, this represents a $2.6 billion new investment in helping First Nations
students learn and succeed.
We will provide new funding to help Indigenous communities promote and
preserve Indigenous languages and cultures.
We will also invest an additional $500 million over the next three years for
building and refurbishing First Nations schools.
We will invest $50 million in additional annual funding to the PostSecondary Student Support Program, which supports Indigenous students
attending post-secondary education, ensuring the program will keep up with
growing demand.

47   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 We believe that First Nations’ control of First Nations education is vital to
achieving improved outcomes, and we will make these investments as part of a
renewed, respectful, and inclusive nation-to-nation process that fully respects
Aboriginal and Treaty rights.

MÉTIS NATION

We will work with the Métis Nation to improve the quality of life for Métis
individuals and communities.
We will work, on a nation-to-nation basis, with the Métis Nation to advance
reconciliation and renew the relationship, based on cooperation, respect for
rights, our international obligations, and a commitment to end the status quo.
We will work with Métis people, as well as the provinces and territories, to
establish a federal claims process that recognizes Métis self-government and
resolves outstanding claims.
We will also make permanent the funding available to provincial Métis
communities for Métis identification and registration, instead of it being available
year-to-year.
We will review, in partnership with Métis communities, the existing federal
programs and services available to the Métis Nation, to identify gaps and areas
where strategic investments can be made to improve Métis quality of life.
To expand the economic opportunities for Métis, we will develop a Métis
Economic Development Strategy in partnership with Métis communities and
existing Métis financial institutions, and will invest $25 million over five years to
implement this new strategy.

MISSING AND
MURDERED
INDIGENOUS WOMEN
AND GIRLS

TRUTH AND
RECONCILIATION

We will immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and
murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.
The disappearance and death of nearly 1,200 Indigenous women and girls is an
ongoing national tragedy that must come to an end.
We will immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and murdered
Indigenous women and girls in Canada, to seek recommendations on concrete
actions that governments, law enforcement, and others can take to solve these
crimes and prevent future ones.
We will enact the recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission.
To support the work of reconciliation, and continue the necessary process of
truth telling and healing, we will work alongside provinces and territories, and
with First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit, to enact the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, starting with the implementation of
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

48   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 THE FUTURE WE
OWE OUR VETERANS
Veterans and their families have earned our respect and gratitude.
It is time our government lived up to its sacred obligation to them.
Our plan will give back to those who have given so much in service to all
Canadians, and will ensure that no veteran has to fight the government for
the support and compensation they have earned.

VETERANS’ PENSIONS

We will give veterans more compensation, more choice, and more support in
planning their financial future.
We will re-establish lifelong pensions as an option for our injured veterans, and
increase the value of the disability award. We will ensure that every injured
veteran has access to financial advice and support so that they can determine the
form of compensation that works best for them and their families.
To better support veterans who have had their career options limited by a
service-related illness or injury, we will invest $25 million each year to expand
access to the Permanent Impairment Allowance. We will invest a further
$40 million each year to provide injured veterans with 90 percent of their
pre-release salary, and will index this benefit so that it keeps pace with inflation.

49   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 EDUCATION AND
TRAINING

We will honour the service of our veterans and provide new career
opportunities through a new Veterans Education Benefit.
Veterans have proven their ability to work hard and succeed, but many find it
difficult to build new careers after their years of service.
To help veterans re-enter the workforce, and to help expand Canada’s skilled
labour force, we will invest $80 million every year to create a new Veterans
Education Benefit. This benefit will provide full support for the costs of up to four
years of college, university, or technical education for Canadian Forces veterans
after completion of service.
We will also expand the number of job opportunities available to veterans
by ensuring provisions for their employment are included in the Community
Benefits Agreements of federal infrastructure projects.

BETTER SERVICE

We will make it easier for veterans to access services, including mental
health services.
We will deliver a higher standard of service and care, and ensure that a
“one veteran, one standard” approach is upheld.
To restore access to the support that veterans are due, we will re-open the
nine Veterans Affairs service offices closed by Stephen Harper, and will fully
implement all of the Auditor General’s recommendations on enhancing mental
health service delivery to veterans.
We will hire 400 new service delivery staff, doubling the current planned
increase. This will include much-needed case managers at Veterans Affairs. We
will also immediately hire additional mental health professionals to give veterans
the support they need.
Canada must be a world leader in caring for and supporting our veterans, and
a Liberal government will budget $20 million to create two new centres of
excellence in veterans’ care, including one with a specialization in mental health,
PTSD, and related issues for both veterans and first responders.

MORE SUPPORT FOR
VETERANS’ FAMILIES

We will do more to support the families of Canada’s veterans.
Veterans have given years of their lives in service to Canada. So have
their families.
We will provide greater education, counselling, and training for families who
are providing care and support to veterans living with physical and/or mental
health issues as a result of their service. We will also end the time limit for
surviving spouses to apply for vocational rehabilitation and assistance services.
Our investment of $100 million each year will expand the circle of support for
veterans’ families.

50   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 So that surviving veterans’ partners do not face a decline in quality of life with the
loss of their loved one, we will increase the veteran survivor’s pension amount
from 50 percent to 70 percent. We will also eliminate the “marriage after 60”
clawback clause, so that surviving spouses of veterans receive appropriate
pension and health benefits.
Veterans served Canada with honour and deserve to be treated with dignity
when they pass away. As our final act of respect, we will double funding to the
Last Post Fund to ensure that all veterans receive a dignified burial.

51   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 KEEPING CANADIANS SAFE
Canada is fundamentally a safe and peaceful nation. Our plan will
keep Canadians safe and protect their rights, without resorting to the
politics of fear or letting ideology trump evidence in decision-making.

PREVENTING
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
AND SEXUAL ASSAULT

We will give more support to survivors of domestic violence, sexual assault,
and sexual harassment, and ensure that more perpetrators are brought
to justice.
For far too many Canadians – overwhelmingly women – sexual violence, sexual
harassment, and intimate partner violence are real, and even daily, threats.
Many survivors choose not to report these incidents to police and conviction
rates are low.
Working together with experts and advocates, we will develop and implement
a comprehensive federal gender violence strategy and action plan, aligned with
existing provincial strategies.
We will ensure that no one fleeing domestic violence is left without a place
to turn. We will increase investments in growing and maintaining Canada’s
network of shelters and transition houses, as part of our broader investment in
social infrastructure.
We will amend the Criminal Code to reverse onus on bail for those with previous
convictions of intimate partner violence. We will also specify that intimate
partner violence be considered an aggravating factor at sentencing, and increase
the maximum sentence for repeat offenders.

52   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 We will work in partnership with provinces and territories to bolster public
awareness campaigns, and take action to ensure that Parliament and federal
institutions – including the public service, the RCMP, and the Canadian Armed
Forces – are workplaces free from harassment and sexual violence.
We will review current gender- and culturally-sensitive training policies for
federal front-line law enforcement officers to ensure that they are strong and
effective.
To help those who are new to Canada, we will change the rules so that spouses
immigrating to Canada receive immediate permanent residency – rather than
a two-year waiting period. This will make it possible for spouses – most often
women – to work and achieve financial independence.
We will also immediately launch a national public inquiry into missing and
murdered Indigenous women and girls in Canada.

BILL C-51

We will repeal the problematic elements of Bill C-51, and introduce new
legislation that better balances our collective security with our rights
and freedoms.
Canadians know that in Canada, we can both improve our security while
protecting our rights and freedoms.
We will introduce new legislation that will, among other measures:
• 

guarantee that all Canadian Security Intelligence Service warrants
respect the Charter of Rights and Freedoms;

• 

establish an all-party national security oversight committee;

• 

ensure that Canadians are not limited from lawful protests and advocacy;

• 

require that government review all appeals by Canadians on the no-fly
list;

• 

narrow overly broad definitions, such as defining “terrorist propaganda”
more clearly;

• 

limit Communications Security Establishment’s powers by requiring a
warrant to engage in the surveillance of Canadians;

• 

require a statutory review of the full Anti-Terrorism Act after three years;
and

• 

prioritize community outreach and counter-radicalization, by creating
the Office of the Community Outreach and Counter-radicalization Coordinator.

As this legislation is tabled in Parliament, we will launch broad public
consultations, to engage and seek the input of Canadians and subject-matter
experts.

53   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 GUNS

We will take action to get handguns and assault weapons off our streets.
Over the last decade, Stephen Harper has steadily weakened our gun laws in
ways that make Canadians more vulnerable and communities more dangerous.
We will take pragmatic action to make it harder for criminals to get, and use,
handguns and assault weapons. We will:
• 

repeal changes made by Bill C-42 that allow restricted and prohibited
weapons to be freely transported without a permit, and we will put
decision-making about weapons restrictions back in the hands of police,
not politicians;

• 

provide $100 million each year to the provinces and territories to support
guns and gangs police task forces to take illegal guns off our streets and
reduce gang violence;

• 

modify the membership of the Canadian Firearms Advisory Committee
to include knowledgeable law enforcement officers, public health
advocates, representatives from women’s groups, and members of the
legal community;

• 

require enhanced background checks for anyone seeking to purchase a
handgun or other restricted firearm;

• 

require purchasers of firearms to show a license when they buy a gun,
and require all sellers of firearms to confirm that the license is valid
before completing the sale;

• 

require firearms vendors to keep records of all firearms inventory and
sales to assist police in investigating firearms trafficking and other gun
crimes;

• 

immediately implement the imported gun marking regulations that have
been repeatedly delayed by Stephen Harper; and

• 

as part of our investment in border infrastructure, invest in technologies
to enhance our border guards’ ability to detect and halt illegal guns from
the United States entering into Canada.

We will not create a new national long-gun registry to replace the one that has
been dismantled.
We will ensure that Canada becomes a party to the international Arms Trade
Treaty.

54   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 MARIJUANA

We will legalize, regulate, and restrict access to marijuana.
Canada’s current system of marijuana prohibition does not work. It does not
prevent young people from using marijuana and too many Canadians end up with
criminal records for possessing small amounts of the drug.
Arresting and prosecuting these offenses is expensive for our criminal justice
system. It traps too many Canadians in the criminal justice system for minor,
non-violent offenses. At the same time, the proceeds from the illegal drug
trade support organized crime and greater threats to public safety, like human
trafficking and hard drugs.
To ensure that we keep marijuana out of the hands of children, and the profits
out of the hands of criminals, we will legalize, regulate, and restrict access to
marijuana.
We will remove marijuana consumption and incidental possession from the
Criminal Code, and create new, stronger laws to punish more severely those who
provide it to minors, those who operate a motor vehicle while under its influence,
and those who sell it outside of the new regulatory framework.
We will create a federal/provincial/territorial task force, and with input from
experts in public health, substance abuse, and law enforcement, will design a new
system of strict marijuana sales and distribution, with appropriate federal and
provincial excise taxes applied.

55   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 INVESTING IN OUR CULTURAL
AND CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
Canada’s stories, shaped by our immense diversity, deserve to be
celebrated and shared. Our plan will protect our important national
institutions, safeguard our official languages, promote the industries that
reflect our unique identity as Canadians, and provide jobs and
economic opportunities.

CBC/RADIO-CANADA

We will reverse Stephen Harper’s cuts and make new investments to support
our national broadcaster.
As the anchor to our cultural and creative industries, CBC/Radio-Canada is a vital
national institution that brings Canadians together, promotes and defends our
two official languages, and supports our shared culture.
By severely cutting its budget, Stephen Harper has jeopardized our national
broadcaster’s ability to do this important work.
We will protect the interests of our national broadcaster, in the interests of all
Canadians. We will reverse Stephen Harper’s cuts and invest $150 million in new
annual funding for CBC/Radio-Canada, to be delivered in consultation with the
broadcaster and the Canadian cultural community.
We will review the process by which members are appointed to the
CBC/Radio-Canada Board of Directors, to ensure merit-based and
independent appointments.

56   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 CULTURAL AND
CREATIVE INDUSTRIES

We will invest in our cultural and creative industries to create jobs and grow
the middle class, and to strengthen our rich Canadian identity.
Canada’s cultural and creative industries are a vibrant part of our national identity
and our economy, providing employment to more than one million Canadians.
Unfortunately, these industries have been under attack during the Harper
decade, hit by funding cuts that have made it harder for Canadian artists to share
Canadian stories, here in Canada and around the world.
We will invest in our cultural and creative industries to help support and grow
these nation-building efforts.
Targeted investments will include:
• 

doubling investment in the Canada Council for the Arts to $360 million
each year;

• 

increasing funding for Telefilm Canada and the National Film Board, with
a new investment totalling $25 million each year; and

• 

restoring the Promart and Trade Routes international cultural promotion
programs cut by Stephen Harper, and increasing funding in these
programs to $25 milllion each year.

As part of our commitment to create 40,000 youth jobs each year, we will
increase funding for the Young Canada Works program to help prepare the next
generation of Canadians working in the heritage sector.
We will also make significant new investments in cultural infrastructure as part of
our investment in social infrastructure.

OFFICIAL LANGUAGES

We will encourage and promote the use of Canada’s official languages.
Canada’s diversity is its strength. That includes our proud tradition of official
bilingualism.
Stephen Harper ignores this diversity by appointing unilingual
Anglophones to important positions ranging from the Auditor General to
Supreme Court Justices.
We will renew the federal government’s commitment to our official
languages by:
• 

developing a new official languages plan to support English and French
linguistic minorities;

• 

ensuring that all federal services be delivered in full compliance with the
Official Languages Act;

57   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 • 

establishing a free, online service for learning and retaining English and
French as second languages;

• 

reinstating the Court Challenges Program of Canada cut by Stephen
Harper; and

• 

making new investments to support CBC/Radio-Canada, a vital national
institution that brings Canadians together, promotes and defends our
two official languages, and supports our shared culture.

58   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 SUPPORTING STRONG
COMMUNITIES
Canada’s economic success comes from its strong communities, and
the exceptional people who live, work, and serve in them every day.
When we support those who make our communities great places to live,
we all benefit.

COMMUNITY HEROES

We will offer greater financial security to the families of disabled or deceased
public safety officers, and deliver a new plan to address PTSD.
We ask public safety officers to stand in harm’s way to protect Canadians and
keep us safe, and they deserve the highest level of support and care when the
unthinkable happens.
We will introduce a public safety officer compensation benefit to be paid to the
families of fire fighters, police officers, and paramedics killed or permanently
disabled in the line of duty. This $300,000 benefit will offer a measure of
financial security to families who are struggling with permanently changed life
circumstances or the loss of a loved one.
When it comes to post-traumatic stress disorder, the kind of support that a first
responder receives should be based on their need, not on where they live. We will
work with the provinces and territories to develop a coordinated national action
plan on post-traumatic stress disorder, which disproportionately affects public
safety officers.

59   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

 SEARCH AND RESCUE

We will restore funding for Canada’s four heavy urban search and
rescue teams.
Being able to respond swiftly and effectively to emergencies like ice storms,
floods, wildfires, and building collapses is in our national interest. In the past,
Canada’s four heavy urban search and rescue teams have proven invaluable in
keeping Canadians and communities safe.
Under Stephen Harper, funding for these teams has been eliminated, putting our
national response capabilities in jeopardy.
To protect Canadians, our oceans, and our coastal economies, we will also
re-open the Maritime Rescue Sub-centre in St. John’s, and the Kitsilano Coast
Guard Base in Vancouver, which were closed by Stephen Harper.

60   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 4: A STRONG CANADA

  

CHAPTER FIVE

Secu?byamd
Opportunity

OPENING THE DOOR TO
PROSPERITY
Canada’s story is the story of immigration. Those who choose to
make Canada their new home bring with them their unique cultures,
languages, and an entrepreneurial spirit that strengthens our economy.
We need a new plan for our immigration system that is grounded in
compassion and economic opportunity for all.

REUNITING FAMILIES

We will make it easier for immigrants to build successful lives in Canada, and
contribute to the economic success of all Canadians.
Immigration has always been an important part of Canada’s economic growth,
but over the past decade, Stephen Harper has turned his back on welcoming
those who want to contribute to our country’s success.
We will take immediate steps to reopen Canada’s doors, and will make reuniting
families a top priority.
We will immediately double the number of applications allowed for parents and
grandparents, to 10,000 each year.
We will also nearly double the budget for processing family class sponsorship.
Wait times will come down – which currently average almost four years for
parent and grandparent applications.
We will provide more opportunities for applicants who have Canadian siblings by
giving additional points under the Express Entry system, and we will restore the

62   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 maximum age for dependents to 22 from 19, to allow more Canadians to bring
their children to Canada.
We will also grant immediate permanent residency to new spouses entering
Canada, eliminating the two-year waiting period.

INTERNATIONAL
STUDENTS AND
TEMPORARY
RESIDENTS

REMITTANCES

We will give international students and temporary residents credit for time
already spent in Canada.
We will make it easier for international students and other temporary residents
to become Canadian citizens by restoring the residency time credit. We will
also make changes to the Canadian Experience Class, to reduce the barriers to
immigration imposed on international students.

We will make it more affordable for Canadian workers to send money
overseas.
We will work with provincial and territorial governments to better regulate the
remittance industry, so that residents of Canada who send money overseas to
help family members are not gouged by high fees.
This will include working with Canada’s banks to ensure low-cost access to
transfer services, exploring ways for Canada Post to offer remittance services,
and imposing tough new penalties on those who abuse the system and take
advantage of vulnerable newcomers to Canada.

HIRING CAREGIVERS

We will make it easier and more affordable to hire caregivers.
Canadian families looking for caregivers to help family members with physical or
mental disabilities must pay a $1,000 Labour Market Impact Assessment fee. We
will eliminate that fee.
We will also work with the provinces and territories to develop a system of
regulated companies to hire caregivers on behalf of families. This will make it
simpler for families to hire caregivers, and protect caregivers by allowing them to
change employers in the case of bad relations or abuse.

63   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 A MORE COMPASSIONATE
CANADA
Canadians are open, accepting, and generous – qualities that should
be reflected in Canada’s response to those seeking refuge from conflict
and war. Our communities are strengthened when we come together to
help those in need. Canada’s government should do the same.

SYRIAN REFUGEES

We will welcome more refugees from Syria to Canada, and offer more help to
those providing aid in the region.
Canadians have been deeply moved by the suffering of refugees in Syria and the
surrounding region. Canada has a strong history of helping those in need, from
Hungarian refugees in the 1950s to Ismaili Muslim refugees in the 1970s to those
fleeing South East Asia by boat in the 1970s and 1980s.
Many Canadians have already offered to help those fleeing Syria, and it is time
for the federal government to offer more help, too. We have a responsibility to
expand our refugee targets and give more victims of war a safe haven in Canada.
To that end, we will expand Canada’s intake of refugees from Syria by 25,000
through immediate government sponsorship. We will also work with private
sponsors to accept even more. To do this, we will invest $250 million, including
$100 million this fiscal year, to increase refugee processing, as well as sponsorship
and settlement services capacity in Canada.

64   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 We will also provide a new contribution of $100 million this fiscal year to the
United Nations High Commission for Refugees to support critical relief activities
in the region.

REFUGEES

We will restore Canada’s reputation and help more people in need through a
program that is safe, secure, and humane.
Canada once welcomed refugees openly, but that proud history has faded after a
decade of mismanagement under Stephen Harper. We will renew and expand our
commitment to helping resettle more refugees, and deliver a refugee program
that is safe, secure, and humane.
We will:

HELP FOR THE
WORLD’S POOR

• 

fully restore the Interim Federal Health Program that provides limited
and temporary health benefits to refugees and refugee claimants;

• 

establish an expert human rights panel to determine designated
countries of origin, and provide a right to appeal refugee decisions for
citizens from these countries; and

• 

appoint individuals with appropriate subject-matter expertise to
Canada’s Immigration and Refugee Board.

We will refocus our development assistance on helping the poorest and most
vulnerable.
Over the past ten years, Stephen Harper has steadily shifted aid away from the
world’s poorest countries, particularly in Africa.
We will consult with Canadian and international aid organizations to review
current policies and funding frameworks that will refocus our aid priorities on
poverty reduction.
As part of rebalancing our priorities, we will ensure that every dollar committed
to international development actually gets spent. We will not allow funds to
lapse, as Stephen Harper has done.
We will also ensure that Canada’s valuable aid initiative on Maternal, Newborn
and Child Health (MNCH) is driven by evidence and outcomes, not ideology.
Closing existing gaps in reproductive rights and health care can and will save lives.
We will cover the full range of reproductive health services as part of MNCH
initiatives.

65   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 EXPANDING EXPORTS AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR CANADIANS
Canada’s economic success relies on strong trade relationships
with our closest neighbours: the United States and Mexico. Unlike
the Conservatives’ short-sighted approach, our focus on rebuilding
relationships will build a solid foundation for greater trade, stronger growth,
and more job creation.

THE UNITED STATES
AND MEXICO

We will renew and repair our relationships with our North American partners.
For the past decade, Stephen Harper has led a government that is increasingly
partisan, suspicious, and hostile when dealing with our closest neighbours:
the United States and Mexico. We will end this antagonism and work with our
partners to advance our shared interests.
As a first step, we will immediately lift the Mexican visa requirement that unfairly
restricts travel to Canada, and commit to rescheduling and hosting a new trilateral
leaders’ summit with the United States and Mexico.
We will work with the United States and Mexico to develop a continent-wide
clean energy and environment agreement.
Because Canada relies on international trade to create jobs and grow our
economy, we will work to reduce the barriers that limit trade. With a re-focused
Building Canada Fund, we will promote a steadier flow of goods and business
travellers by modernizing border infrastructure and streamlining cargo
inspections.

66   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 To underscore the importance of the United States to Canada, we will also create
a Cabinet committee to oversee and manage our relationship.

GETTING CANADIAN
GOODS TO MARKET

We will expand export opportunities that benefit Canada.
Trade is vital for our economy. It opens markets, grows Canadian businesses, and
creates good-paying middle class jobs – jobs that pay wages that are 50 percent
higher than industries that are not export intensive. That is good news for the
middle class and the communities they call home.
Stephen Harper’s approach to trade, however, has failed. His Conservative
government has recorded the largest trade deficit in Canadian history, and
Canadians are paying the price in lost job opportunities.
While Stephen Harper may sign trade deals, he walks away from partnering with
businesses and entrepreneurs to ensure they can succeed in new markets and
create wealth and jobs for Canadians.
Properly negotiated and implemented, free trade agreements are good for the
Canadian economy. We will carefully consider all trade opportunities currently
open to Canada, and explore deeper trade relationships with emerging and
established markets, including China and India.
We will develop a new export promotion strategy that will help businesses take
advantage of new trade agreements.

67   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 RENEWING CANADA’S PLACE
IN THE WORLD AND STRENGTHENING
OUR SECURITY
Canada’s future security and prosperity go hand-in-hand. Our plan
will ensure that Canada’s Armed Forces have the equipment they
need and the support they require to protect our sovereignty and support
peace operations, while also growing local economies and creating jobs.

CANADA’S
LEADERSHIP IN
THE WORLD

We will restore Canadian leadership in the world.
Canada has a proud tradition of international leadership, from helping to create
the United Nations after the Second World War, to the campaign against South
African apartheid, to the international treaty to ban landmines.
Unfortunately, under Stephen Harper, our influence and presence on the
world stage has steadily diminished. Instead of working with other countries
constructively at the United Nations, the Harper Conservatives have turned
their backs on the UN and other multilateral institutions, while also weakening
Canada’s military, our diplomatic service, and our development programs.
Whether confronting climate change, terrorism and radicalization, or
international conflicts, the need for effective Canadian diplomacy has never been
greater than it is today.
Our plan will restore Canada as a leader in the world. Not only to provide greater
security and economic growth for Canadians, but because Canada can make a
real and valuable contribution to a more peaceful and prosperous world.

68   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 PROMOTING
INTERNATIONAL PEACE
AND SECURITY

We will renew Canada’s commitment to peacekeeping operations.
Under Stephen Harper, Canada has dramatically scaled back its involvement in
peace operations – a decision that could not come at a worse time. As the number
of violent conflicts in the world escalates, demand for international peace
operations has never been greater.
Peace operations are important not only because of the help they provide to
millions of people affected by conflicts, but also because they serve Canada’s
interests. A more peaceful world is a safer and more prosperous world for
Canada, too.
We will recommit to supporting international peace operations with the United
Nations, and will make our specialized capabilities – from mobile medical teams to
engineering support to aircraft that can carry supplies and personnel – available
on a case-by-case basis.
To help the UN respond more quickly to emerging and escalating conflicts, we will
provide well-trained personnel that can be quickly deployed, including mission
commanders, staff officers, and headquarters units.
We will prioritize assistance for civilian police training operations, particularly
Francophone officers, who are in great demand in French-speaking countries
with peace operations.
We will lead an international effort to improve and expand the training of military
and civilian personnel deployed on peace operations, and will insist that any
peacekeepers involved in misconduct be held accountable by their own country
and the United Nations.
Finally, to better help those affected by war and violent conflict, we will contribute
more to the United Nations’ mediation, conflict-prevention, and post-conflict
reconstruction efforts.

INVESTING IN
OUR MILITARY

We will maintain current National Defence spending levels, including current
planned increases.
Under Stephen Harper, investments in the Canadian Armed Forces have been
erratic, promised increases in funding have been scaled back, and more than $10
billion of approved funding was left unspent.
This mismanagement has left Canada’s Armed Forces underfunded and illequipped, and the courageous members of the Forces unsupported after years
of dedicated service.
We will not let Canada’s Armed Forces be shortchanged, and we will not lapse
military spending from year to year. We will also reinvest in building a leaner,
more agile, better-equipped military, including adequate support systems for
military personnel and their families.

69   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 F-35

We will not buy the F-35 stealth fighter-bomber.
We will immediately launch an open and transparent competition to replace the
CF-18 fighter aircraft. The primary mission of our fighter aircraft should remain
the defence of North America, not stealth first-strike capability.
We will reduce the procurement budget for replacing the CF-18s, and will instead
purchase one of the many, lower-priced options that better match Canada’s
defence needs.

ROYAL CANADIAN
NAVY

We will make investing in the Royal Canadian Navy a top priority.
By purchasing more affordable alternatives to the F-35s, we will be able to invest
in strengthening our Navy, while also meeting the commitments that were made
as part of the National Shipbuilding and Procurement Strategy. Unlike Stephen
Harper, we will have the funds that we need to build promised icebreakers,
supply ships, arctic and offshore patrol ships, surface combatants, and other
resources required by the Navy.
These investments will ensure that the Royal Canadian Navy is able to operate as
a true blue-water maritime force, while also growing our economy and creating
jobs.

STRATEGIC
PRIORITIES

We will immediately begin an open and transparent review process of
existing defence capabilities, with the goal of delivering a more effective,
better-equipped military.
The Canada First Defence Strategy, launched by Stephen Harper in 2008, is
underfunded and out of date. We will review current programs and capabilities,
and lay out a realistic plan to strengthen Canada’s Armed Forces.
We will develop the Canadian Armed Forces into an agile, responsive, and wellequipped military force that can effectively defend Canada and North America;
provide support during natural disasters, humanitarian support missions, and
peace operations; and offer international deterrence and combat capability.
We will continue to work with the United States to defend North America under
NORAD, and contribute to regional security within the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.
We will ensure that equipment is acquired faster, and with vigorous Parliamentary
oversight.
We will put a renewed focus on surveillance and control of Canadian territory
and approaches, particularly our Arctic regions, and will increase the size of the
Canadian Rangers.

70   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 We will continue to support international peace and security operations, as well
as humanitarian support missions with the United Nations or regional partners,
on a case-by-case basis.
We will assist in domestic security and natural disaster responses, both at home
and abroad.
To help regional and local partners prevent the spread of terrorism and
radicalization, we will vastly increase the scope of training assistance missions.
To bolster these partnerships, we will support programs that admit and train
partner country military students.
We will conduct a thorough review of existing measures to protect Canadians
and our critical infrastructure from cyber-threats.
Most importantly, we will protect the well-being of Canadian Armed Forces
members while in service, including a zero-tolerance policy for sexual harassment,
adequate mental health support services, and high-quality career counselling
and support.
We will also make new and significant investments to meet the sacred obligation
that we have to our veterans.

REPORT ON
TRANSFORMATION

We will implement the recommendations made in the Canadian Forces’
Report on Transformation.
The Canadian Armed Forces’ ability to protect Canada’s borders and work with
our allies overseas should never be compromised. Threats to its ability to meet
future obligations must be addressed head on.
The Report on Transformation made a series of recommendations on how to
build a more modern, efficient, and effective military, including reducing the size
of administration within government and the Canadian Armed Forces in order to
strengthen front-line operations.

COMBAT MISSION
IN IRAQ

CENTRAL AND
EASTERN EUROPE

We will end Canada’s combat mission in Iraq.
We will refocus Canada’s military contribution in the region on the training of local
forces, while providing more humanitarian support and immediately welcoming
25,000 more refugees from Syria.

We will remain fully committed to Canada’s existing military contributions in
Central and Eastern Europe.
This includes Canada’s participation in NATO assurance measures in Central
and Eastern Europe (Operation REASSURANCE) and the multinational training
mission in Ukraine (Operation UNIFIER).

71   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 5: SECURITY AND OPPORTUNITY

 Fiscal Plan
and Costing

 

OUR PLAN

CHOOSING INVESTMENT NOW

Our plan makes different choices than the Harper Conservatives and
the NDP. For example:
We will cancel child benefit cheques for millionaires so that we can increase
child benefits for the middle class and those working hard to join it.
We will increase the marginal tax rate on Canada’s top one percent so that we
can cut taxes for the middle class.
We will conduct a review of all tax expenditures to target tax loopholes that
particularly benefit Canada’s top one percent.
We will be honest about the government of Canada’s fiscal position, and base
our projections on the recent report by the Parliamentary Budget Officer, instead of April’s outdated budget figures.
We will run modest deficits for three years so that we can invest in growth for
the middle class and credibly offer a plan to balance the budget in 2019.
Our choices mean that our plan will bring meaningful and immediate change to the
lives of all Canadians.

73   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 OUR FISCAL APPROACH
The foundation of the fiscal plan over our mandate is a planning framework that is realistic, sustainable, prudent,
and transparent. These are core principles advocated by Canadian fiscal experts.1
A realistic approach recognizes that the economic and fiscal projections of the federal government have deteriorated since the budget was tabled in April. This year, 2015, started with a recession, the economic and fiscal
impacts of which have been projected by the Parliamentary Budget Officer using the Bank of Canada’s July Monetary Policy Report.
Real GDP Growth Projections (%)

2015/16

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

Budget 2015 (April)

1.9

2.3

2.3

2.2

2.0

PBO 2015/16 – 2017/18 and projection
2018/19 – 2019/20

1.0

2.7

2.4

2.2

2.2

Projections in fiscal years – per PBO format.

We project a reduction in the budget’s assumption
for nominal GDP levels and fiscal balance, which
only begins to mitigate in 2018/19 and 2019/20.
This reflects the Bank of Canada’s projections for
sharply lower real GDP growth in 2015, and slight
increases in real GDP growth in outer years versus
budget forecasts, as excess capacity from the recession is recovered.
External economic projections continue to change
and these represent realistic projections for the
years ahead. A new Liberal government will release a fall Economic and Fiscal Update so that
Canadians can get a more accurate picture of the
federal government’s revised position since April.
In every year of our plan, federal debt-to-GDP will
continue to fall. Canada benefits from a low debtto-GDP level and historically low borrowing rates.
Our plan ensures that the government of Canada
1. http://www.3dpolicy.ca

74   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 remains in a sustainable fiscal position. We have two fiscal anchors that guide our overall fiscal framework.

In 2019/20, we will:
•  Reduce the federal debt-to-GDP ratio to 27 percent
•  Balance the budget
Our plan is anchored in prudent forecasting, including restoring a contingency reserve as we return to surplus,
and not budgeting for the positive fiscal impacts of new investments.
We will raise the bar on fiscal transparency. We will ensure accounting consistency among the Estimates and
the Public Accounts; provide costing analysis for each government bill; restore the requirement that government
borrowing plans receive Parliamentary approval; end the inappropriate use of omnibus legislation; and ensure
the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) is truly independent, properly funded, and answerable only, and directly,
to Parliament.

We will also add the costing of political party platforms to the PBO’s mandate,
as is the case in Australia and the Netherlands, so that starting in the next federal election, Canadians can review the fiscal plans of political parties from a credible and
comparable baseline.

75   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 PLANNING FRAMEWORK
We were the first party in this campaign to announce our planning framework.

“...long-lived investment is actually a wonderful thing to be doing. It’s exactly the right
thing to be doing.”
DAVID DODGE, former Governor of the Bank of Canada and former Deputy Minister of Finance

(CBC Radio One, The House, August 29, 2015)

“[This] announcement by the Liberal Party of Canada has the potential to meaningfully
improve the quality of life of Canadians in cities and communities across the country.”
RAYMOND LOUIE, President of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities

(Federation of Canadian Municipalities, August 27, 2015)

“Canada’s Liberal Party is pushing what should be pushed in US– a major infrastructure initiative to get the economy going & build for future.”
LAWRENCE SUMMERS, former Director, President Obama’s National Economic Council

(Twitter, @LHSummers, August 27, 2015)

“...significant and meaningful commitment to meet the urgent need for major infrastructure investment in cities and communities across Canada.”
GREGOR ROBERTSON, Mayor of Vancouver

(Office of the Mayor of Vancouver, August 27, 2015)

With the Liberal plan, the federal government will have a modest short-term deficit of less than $10 billion in
each of the next two fiscal years – less than half the average Harper deficit of over $20 billion per year. After the
next two fiscal years, the deficit will decline and our investment plan will return Canada to a balanced budget
in 2019/20. Combining fiscal prudence with investments in economic growth, we will end the Harper legacy of
chronic deficits and reduce Canada’s federal debt-to-GDP ratio each year.

76   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 The Conservatives and the NDP have based their planning framework on assumptions from the April 2015 budget, before it was understood that Canada was in a recession. Our plan is transparent and honest about the weakened fiscal position that the federal government is facing.
Planning Framework

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

2,700

3,600

4,600

7,800

– 2,100

– 1,400

– 1,200

– 200

600

2,200

3,400

7,600

New revenue

24,663

27,436

29,148

30,681

New investment announced

35,157

39,152

38,266

37,281

Planning framework with Liberal plan for
growth

– 9,894

– 9,516

– 5,718

1,000

30%

29%

28%

27%

April Finance forecast (including contingency)
Estimated impact of reduction in economic
growth
Revised forecast (PBO 2016/17 - 2017/18) +
projection

Federal debt-to-GDP ratio
Figures in millions of dollars

Our plan includes measures that, according to Department of Finance multiplier projections, will have positive
impacts on economic growth, particularly infrastructure investment and measures for lower-income Canadians.
This new economic growth would in turn improve the fiscal position of the federal government. With our plan’s
level of investment, this would translate into additional billions per year for the fiscal bottom line. While these
improvements to the bottom line would be material, consistent with Department of Finance practices, we have
not included them in our planning framework.

Economic Multipliers of Expenditure and Tax Measures
Dollar impact on the level of real
GDP of a one-dollar increase in
fiscal measures
2009

2010

2010Q4

Infrastructure investment measures

1.0

1.5

1.6

Housing investment measures

1.0

1.4

1.5

Other spending measures

0.8

1.3

1.4

Measures for low-income households and the
unemployed

0.8

1.5

1.7

EI premiums

0.2

0.5

0.6

Personal income tax measures

0.4

0.9

1.0

Business tax measures

0.1

0.2

0.3

Fiscal Measure

Source: Department of Finance (2009)

77   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 NEW REVENUE

New Revenue

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

17,960

18,245

18,550

18,825

500

1,000

2,000

3,000

2,800

2,856

2,913

2,971

523

2,100

2,140

2,185

Cancel family income splitting (not pension
income splitting)

1,995

2,050

2,110

2,165

Cancel education/textbook credits to boost
grants

725

825

890

925

Cancel TFSA limit increase from $5,500 to
$10,000

160

235

295

360

Continue to phase out fossil fuel subsidies

-

125

250

250

24,663

27,436

29,148

30,681

Replacing UCCB, CCTB, and NCBS expenditures
Tax expenditure and Harper spending review
Tax on wealthiest one percent
Reduce EI premiums from $1.88 to $1.65

Total new revenue
Figures in millions of dollars

78   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 NOTES:

Replacing the Universal Child Care Benefit (UCCB), Canada Child Tax Benefit (CCTB), and
National Child Benefit Supplement (NCBS) expenditures - Canada Child Benefit
The Canada Child Benefit (CCB) is projected to have a net new cost of $1.8 billion in 2016/17, rising to $2.0 billion
in 2019/20. This reflects a CCB that invests $21.7 billion in 2016/17, the savings from cancelling income splitting
($2.0 billion), and replacing the CCTB, NCBS, and UCCB ($17.9 billion).
CCB cost projections are based on the number of children under 18 by family income (CANSIM Table 111-0013,
Table 111-0022) applied against the CCB’s new benefit levels. Cost projections were compared and confirmed
with Statistics Canada’s Social Policy Simulation Database and Model (SPSD/M). To project future years, the average growth rate for child benefits in recent years was used, based on historical data from Canada Revenue Agency
(CRA) and the Public Accounts.
After the announcement of the Liberal CCB, the Conservatives claimed that Liberals had not accounted for federal revenue from the taxable UCCB. This was proven false. As part of that claim, the Conservatives released
previously unavailable and more detailed Department of Finance data on CCTB/NCBS cost projections, which
showed a reduction in the costs of child benefits in 2014/15.

If there are lower child benefit costs, then the cost of both existing benefits and the new CCB will be reduced. In
fact, using those revised projected child population growth rates would reduce the net cost of the CCB below the
$1.8 billion that we have estimated. We will, therefore, continue to use our higher starting projections to ensure
the most prudent figure possible.
Backgrounder – Real Change: Fairness for the middle class

79   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Tax expenditure and Harper spending review
The government of Canada’s budget is approximately $300 billion per year, totalling over $400 billion per year
when tax expenditures are accounted for. It is important that the federal government is persistently committed
to ensuring federal expenditures are fair for Canadians, efficient, and fiscally responsible. In 2005, then-Prime
Minister Paul Martin tasked National Revenue Minister John McCallum with a government-wide expenditure
review, which resulted in $3 billion in booked annual savings within four years.1
We will meet this same target within four years, which in 2019/20 would represent significantly less than one percent of total federal fiscal and tax expenditure spending. Today’s challenges are different than those in 2005, and
our priorities reflect the changes that are needed after ten years of Harper’s Conservative government. These
include:
• 

Significantly reducing the advertising budget of the government of Canada, and ending the use of
government advertising for partisan activities.

• 

Conducting an overdue and wide-ranging review of the over $100 billion in increasingly complex tax
expenditures that now exist, with the core objective being to look for opportunities to reduce tax benefits
that unfairly help those with individual incomes in excess of $200,000 per year. For example, a recent
Parliamentary Budget Officer analysis of tax expenditure changes from 2005 to 2013 demonstrates that
multiple new measures introduced by Stephen Harper provided new benefits to tax filers in the 96th to
100th percentiles.

• 

A starting point would be to set a cap on how much can be claimed through the stock option deduction.
The Department of Finance estimates that 8,000 very high-income Canadians deduct an average of
$400,000 from their taxable incomes via stock options. This represents three quarters of the fiscal impact
of this deduction, which in total cost $750 million in 2014. Stock options are a useful compensation tool
for start-up companies, and we would ensure that employees with up to $100,000 in annual stock option
gains will be unaffected by any new cap.

• 

Directing CRA to immediately begin an analysis and stronger enforcement of tax evasion, or what the
OECD calls the “tax gap.” According to a 2013 analysis by the Parliamentary Budget Officer, the size of
the gap totals nearly 7 percent of total tax liability in the United Kingdom and 14.5 percent in the United
States. Harper’s Conservative government refused to provide the PBO with the data that is needed to
undertake a similar analysis for Canada.

• 

As we reduce the small business tax rate to 9 percent from 11 percent, we will ensure that CanadianControlled Private Corporation (CCPC) status is not used to reduce personal income tax obligations for
high-income earners rather than supporting small businesses. Michael Wolfson from the University of
Ottawa estimates that approximately $500 million per year is lost, particularly as high-income individuals
use CCPC status as an income splitting tool.

• 

Reducing the use of external consultants, bringing expenditures closer to 2005/06 levels. Here are a few
examples of how this spending item has increased under Harper:
• 

Employment and Social Development Canada (formerly Human Resources and Skills Development

1. http://fin.gc.ca/budget05/booklets/bkexp-eng.asp

80   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Canada) has increased its spending on external “Business Services” by 61 percent since 2006/07,
equivalent to 7 percent compound annual growth – a total increase of $140 million per year.
• 

Public Works and Government Services Canada has increased its spending on external “Business
Services” by 150 percent since 2006/07, equivalent to 14 percent compound annual growth – a total
increase of $188 million per year.

• 

Public Works and Government Services Canada has increased its spending on external “Other”
professional services by 212 percent since 2006/07, equivalent to 18 percent compound annual
growth – a total increase of $332 million per year.

Tax on the wealthiest one percent
Our projection is based on a Library of Parliament analysis which determined that a new tax bracket of 33 percent on individual incomes in excess of $200,000 would have increased revenue in 2014 by $3.24 billion. With
inflation, that estimate increases to approximately $3.4 billion by 2016/17. High earners may attempt to use tax
planning strategies to avoid higher taxes. We will increase enforcement resources for the CRA to ensure tax liabilities are collected. However, we have also included a prudence factor of $600 million in our estimates. We project
revenue of $2.8 billion in 2016/17, rising to $3.0 billion in 2019/20.

Cancel the education and textbook tax credits to boost student grants
The current system of post-secondary education tax credits includes the modest textbook and education tax
credits, which only provide a benefit at the end of the tax year, and are not targeted at students from low- and
middle-income families. We will eliminate these two credits in order to boost upfront non-repayable grants that
put money directly into the pockets of students, and to ensure our student loan system is more flexible. The current tuition tax credit will remain in place. Revenue projections are derived from the Department of Finance tax
expenditures report, with a four year window for usage of outstanding carried forward credits.

Continue to phase out fossil fuel subsidies
We will fulfill Canada’s G20 commitment to phase out subsidies for the fossil fuel industry. In 2014, the Pembina
Institute estimated that more than $1 billion in fossil fuel subsidies still existed in our current tax framework. We
will direct the Department of Finance to conduct a detailed analysis of fossil fuel subsidies. A target of $250 million in reduced fossil fuel subsidies is our starting point, and a first step will be to allow for the use of the Canadian
Exploration Expenses tax deduction only in cases of unsuccessful exploration.

81   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 NEW INVESTMENTS

New Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

25,550

26,136

26,747

27,293

5,025

5,025

3,450

3,450

524

2,100

2,140

2,185

2,155

2,254

2,267

1,689

Health

415

665

900

1,000

Environment and the economy

415

1,445

1,400

400

Arts and culture

185

380

380

380

Indigenous Peoples

275

575

455

355

Veterans

325

309

311

313

Strengthening communities

155

155

158

158

Immigration

133

108

58

58

35,157

39,152

38,226

37,281

Tax cuts and benefits
Infrastructure
Employment Insurance
Jobs and training

Total New Investments
Figures in millions of dollars

82   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Tax Cuts and Benefits
Tax Cut / Benefit
Canada Child Benefit
Middle class tax cut
10 percent boost to GIS for single seniors
Index OAS/GIS to Seniors Price Index
GST rebate for new rental housing construction
Increased and Indexed Northern Residents
Deduction

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

21,725

22,160

22,600

23,000

2,870

2,925

3,000

3,050

720

760

800

840

55

105

160

210

125

130

130

135

50

51

52

53

5

5

5

5

Enhanced flexibility of RRSP Home Buyer’s Plan
Figures in millions of dollars

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Canada Child Benefit costing is described above under New Revenue
Middle class tax cut projection from PBO calculation
Northern Residents Deduction projected from Finance Tax Expenditure Report, cross referenced with
Budget 2008 NRD changes
Projections for GIS data from the Chief Actuary1
Projection for seniors inflation calculated from Statistics Canada analysis2
GST rebate projected from existing 33 percent rebate, with higher take-up
Assumes higher take-up of RRSP Home Buyer’s Plan from enhanced flexibility

Backgrounder – Real Change: Fairness for the middle class
Backgrounder – Real Change: Retirement security for our seniors
Backgrounder – Real Change: Affordable housing for Canadians

Infrastructure
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

Public transit infrastructure

1,675

1,675

1,150

1,150

Social infrastructure

1,675

1,675

1,150

1,150

Green infrastructure

1,675

1,675

1,150

1,150

Figures in millions of dollars
Backgrounder – Real Change: An historic investment plan to strengthen the middle class, create jobs, and grow the middle class

1. http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/eng/oca-bac/ar-ra/oas-psv/pages/oas12.aspx
2. http://www41.statcan.gc.ca/2007/70000/ceb70000_004-eng.htm

83   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Employment Insurance
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

End new and re-entering worker EI discrimination

138

550

560

570

Reduce waiting period to one week

175

700

725

750

More flexible parental leave

30

125

125

130

Better access to compassionate care

48

190

195

200

125

500

500

500

8

35

35

35

Increase LMDA training funding
Reverse 2012 EI changes
Figures in millions of dollars

Projections from ESDC analysis, EI Monitoring and Assessment Report, Canada Gazette, with assumed higher
take-up of enriched existing benefits due to enhancements (compassionate care, parental benefits).
Backgrounder – Real Change: Employment Insurance that strengthens our economy and works for Canadians
Backgrounder – Real Change: Working for modern Canadian families
Backgrounder – Real Change: Better compassionate support for caregivers

Jobs and Training
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

Increased Canada Student Grant

750

800

825

850

Youth job strategy

455

455

435

125

Jobs and innovation

300

300

300

0

New training investment

200

200

200

200

Restore Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital
Corporations tax credit

115

160

165

165

Increase Repayment Assistance Plan threshold
to $25,000

115

119

122

129

Agriculture innovation and safety

85

85

85

85

Teacher tax benefit

60

60

60

60

Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training

50

50

50

50

Building Trades Training Equipment

25

25

25

25

Figures in millions of dollars

• 
• 

Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations tax credit restoration from Department of
Finance projections
Teacher and Early Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Benefit estimated from Prince Edward Island
baseline

84   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 • 

• 

Increased Canada Student Grants projected using Statistics Canada data on post-secondary enrollments
(CANSIM 477-0019), families by income (CANSIM 111-0013), projected population in Canada by age
(CANSIM 052-0005), and the most recent Canada Student Loan Program Annual Report and Statistical
Review
Increased Repayment Assistance Program threshold projected using the most recent Canada Student
Loan Program Annual Report, and Canada Student Loan Program Actuarial Report done by the Office of
the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada

Press Release – Liberal Party of Canada Leader Justin Trudeau shares economic vision for Canada
Backgrounder – Real Change: Jobs and skills training for Canadians
Backgrounder – Real Change: Investing in our children and educators

Health
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

400

650

900

1,000

15

15

0

0

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

0

1,000

1,000

0

Resource sector clean-tech strategies

200

200

200

200

Clean-tech production

100

100

100

100

National Parks programming and science

50

50

50

50

Water science and monitoring

50

50

50

50

Free entry for National Parks in 2017

15

45

-

-

New Health Accord - Home care
Public health healthy kids campaign
(vaccinations, concussions)
Figures in millions of dollars

Environment and Economy
Investment
Low Carbon Economy Trust

Figures in millions of dollars

• 

Low Carbon Economy Trust will be endowed by the federal government but operated through a federalprovincial partnership that flows funding to projects that reduce carbon pollution

Backgrounder – Real Change: A new plan for Canada’s environment and economy

85   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Arts and Culture
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

Renewed investment in CBC/Radio-Canada

75

150

150

150

Export promotion of arts

10

25

25

25

Investment in NFB/Telefilm

10

25

25

25

Double funding for Canada Council for the Arts

90

180

180

180

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

New education partnership with First Nations
(net of existing boost in frame)

100

200

300

300

First Nations education infrastructure

100

300

100

-

Increase to Post-Secondary Student Support
Program

50

50

50

50

Public inquiry into missing and murdered
Indigenous women and girls

20

20

0

0

5

5

5

5

Figures in millions of dollars
Backgrounder – Real Change: Investing in Canadian culture and middle class jobs

Indigenous Peoples
Investment

Métis Economic Development Strategy
Figures in millions of dollars

New education partnership with First Nations is net of funding committed in fiscal framework, but yet to flow to
First Nations. The total commitment to First Nations education is $750 million per year.
Backgrounder – Real Change: Education and economic opportunity for First Nations

86   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Veterans
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

Expanded Permanent Impairment Allowance

25

25

25

25

Increase Earnings Loss Benefit

38

42

44

46

New Veterans Education Benefit

80

80

80

80

Re-open nine VAC offices

7

7

7

7

Increase the Last Post Fund by 50 percent

5

5

5

5

100

100

100

100

Veterans’ care Centres of Excellence

20

0

0

0

Expand Veterans Affairs service staff

50

50

50

50

Support for veterans and their families

Figures in millions of dollars

• 
• 
• 
• 

Permanent Impairment Allowance and Earnings Loss Benefit projections based on Veterans Ombudsman
projections, less modest increases since by the government
Veterans Education Benefit based on number of personnel leaving the CAF each year, cost of a year of
post-secondary education, and high take-up rate
Cost of Veterans Affairs offices from government projections
The actuarial impact of restoring lifelong pensions for injured veterans and increasing survivors pensions
will be booked immediately in 2015/16

Backgrounder – Real Change: The future we owe our veterans

Strengthening Communities
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

100

100

100

100

Community Heroes Fund

10

10

10

10

Investment in Nutrition North

10

10

11

11

Search and rescue

10

10

12

12

Greater enforcement resources for CRA

20

20

20

20

5

5

5

5

Guns and gangs police task forces

Court Challenges Program
Figures in millions of dollars

87   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 Immigration
Investment

2016/17

2017/18

2018/19

2019/20

25

50

50

50

8

8

8

8

100

50

0

0

Reduce application processing time
Eliminate assessment fee for caregivers
25,000 Syrian refugee intake
Figures in millions of dollars

• 
• 

Assessment fee based on CIC statistics for caregiver approvals
Additional $100 million immediately for intake in 2015/2016 and $100 million to UNHCR

Backgrounder – Real Change: A new plan for Canadian immigration and economic opportunity

88   REAL CHANGE: A NEW PLAN FOR A STRONG MIDDLE CLASS  

CHAPTER 6: FISCAL PLAN AND COSTING

 